<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Third Edition, Vol. 7 of 12)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 10, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">42067</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="sa"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="es"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="ja"></language>
      <language id="nl"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="gd"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-02-10">February 10, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Magic and Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Social Anthropology in the University of Liverpool</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. VII. of XII.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Part V: Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. 1 of 2.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1912</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
In the last part of this work we examined the figure of
the Dying and Reviving God as it appears in the Oriental
religions of classical antiquity. With the present instalment
of <hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi> we pursue the same theme in other
religions and among other races. Passing from the East to
Europe we begin with the religion of ancient Greece, which
embodies the now familiar conception in two typical examples,
the vine-god Dionysus and the corn-goddess Persephone,
with her mother and duplicate Demeter. Both of these
Greek divinities are personifications of cultivated plants, and
a consideration of them naturally leads us on to investigate
similar personifications elsewhere. Now of all the plants
which men have artificially reared for the sake of food the
cereals are on the whole the most important; therefore it is
natural that the religion of primitive agricultural communities
should be deeply coloured by the principal occupation of
their lives, the care of the corn. Hence the frequency with
which the figures of the Corn-mother and Corn-maiden,
answering to the Demeter and Persephone of ancient Greece,
meet us in other parts of the world, and not least of all on
the harvest-fields of modern Europe. But edible roots as
well as cereals have been cultivated by many races, especially
in the tropical regions, as a subsidiary or even as a principal
means of subsistence; and accordingly they too enter largely
into the religious ideas of the peoples who live by them.
Yet in the case of the roots, such as yams, taro, and potatoes,
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
the conception of the Dying and Reviving God appears to
figure less prominently than in the case of the cereals, perhaps
for the simple reason that while the growth and decay
of the one sort of fruit go on above ground for all to see, the
similar processes of the other are hidden under ground and
therefore strike the popular imagination less forcibly.
</p>

<p>
Having surveyed the variations of our main theme among
the agricultural races of mankind, we prosecute the enquiry
among savages who remain more or less completely in the
hunting, fishing, and pastoral stages of society. The same
motive which leads the primitive husbandman to adore the
corn or the roots, induces the primitive hunter, fowler, fisher,
or herdsman to adore the beasts, birds, or fishes which furnish
him with the means of subsistence. To him the conception
of the death of these worshipful beings is naturally presented
with singular force and distinctness; since it is no figurative
or allegorical death, no poetical embroidery thrown over the
skeleton, but the real death, the naked skeleton, that constantly
thrusts itself importunately on his attention. And
strange as it may seem to us civilised men, the notion of
the immortality and even of the resurrection of the lower
animals appears to be almost as familiar to the savage and
to be accepted by him with nearly as unwavering a faith as
the obvious fact of their death and destruction. For the most
part he assumes as a matter of course that the souls of dead
animals survive their decease; hence much of the thought
of the savage hunter is devoted to the problem of how he can
best appease the naturally incensed ghosts of his victims so
as to prevent them from doing him a mischief. This refusal
of the savage to recognise in death a final cessation of the
vital process, this unquestioning faith in the unbroken continuity
of all life, is a fact that has not yet received the
attention which it seems to merit from enquirers into
the constitution of the human mind as well as into the
history of religion. In the following pages I have collected
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
examples of this curious faith; I must leave it to others to
appraise them.
</p>

<p>
Thus on the whole we are concerned in these volumes
with the reverence or worship paid by men to the natural
resources from which they draw their nutriment, both vegetable
and animal. That they should invest these resources
with an atmosphere of wonder and awe, often indeed with a
halo of divinity, is no matter for surprise. The circle of
human knowledge, illuminated by the pale cold light of
reason, is so infinitesimally small, the dark regions of human
ignorance which lie beyond that luminous ring are so immeasurably
vast, that imagination is fain to step up to the
border line and send the warm, richly coloured beams of her
fairy lantern streaming out into the darkness; and so,
peering into the gloom, she is apt to mistake the shadowy
reflections of her own figure for real beings moving in
the abyss. In short, few men are sensible of the sharp
line that divides the known from the unknown; to most
men it is a hazy borderland where perception and conception
melt indissolubly into one. Hence to the savage the
ghosts of dead animals and men, with which his imagination
peoples the void, are hardly less real than the solid shapes
which the living animals and men present to his senses;
and his thoughts and activities are nearly as much absorbed
by the one as by the other. Of him it may be said with
perhaps even greater truth than of his civilised brother,
<q>What shadows we are, and what shadows we pursue!</q>
</p>

<p>
But having said so much in this book of the misty glory
which the human imagination sheds round the hard material
realities of the food supply, I am unwilling to leave my
readers under the impression, natural but erroneous, that
man has created most of his gods out of his belly. That is
not so, at least that is not my reading of the history of
religion. Among the visible, tangible, perceptible elements
by which he is surrounded&mdash;and it is only of these that I
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
presume to speak&mdash;there are others than the merely nutritious
which have exerted a powerful influence in touching
his imagination and stimulating his energies, and so have
contributed to build up the complex fabric of religion. To
the preservation of the species the reproductive faculties
are no less essential than the nutritive; and with them we
enter on a very different sphere of thought and feeling, to
wit, the relation of the sexes to each other, with all the
depths of tenderness and all the intricate problems which
that mysterious relation involves. The study of the various
forms, some gross and palpable, some subtle and elusive, in
which the sexual instinct has moulded the religious consciousness
of our race, is one of the most interesting, as it is
one of the most difficult and delicate tasks, which await the
future historian of religion.
</p>

<p>
But the influence which the sexes exert on each other,
intimate and profound as it has been and must always be, is
far indeed from exhausting the forces of attraction by which
mankind are bound together in society. The need of mutual
protection, the economic advantages of co-operation, the
contagion of example, the communication of knowledge, the
great ideas that radiate from great minds, like shafts of light
from high towers,&mdash;these and many other things combine to
draw men into communities, to drill them into regiments,
and to set them marching on the road of progress with a
concentrated force to which the loose skirmishers of mere
anarchy and individualism can never hope to oppose a permanent
resistance. Hence when we consider how intimately
humanity depends on society for many of the boons which
it prizes most highly, we shall probably admit that of all
the forces open to our observation which have shaped
human destiny the influence of man on man is by far the
greatest. If that is so, it seems to follow that among the
beings, real or imaginary, which the religious imagination
has clothed with the attributes of divinity, human spirits are
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
likely to play a more important part than the spirits of
plants, animals, or inanimate objects. I believe that a
careful examination of the evidence, which has still to be
undertaken, will confirm this conclusion; and that if we
could strictly interrogate the phantoms which the human
mind has conjured up out of the depths of its bottomless
ignorance and enshrined as deities in the dim light of
temples, we should find that the majority of them have
been nothing but the ghosts of dead men. However, to
say this is necessarily to anticipate the result of future
research; and if in saying it I have ventured to make a
prediction, which like all predictions is liable to be falsified
by the event, I have done so only from a fear lest, without
some such warning, the numerous facts recorded in these
volumes might lend themselves to an exaggerated estimate
of their own importance and hence to a misinterpretation
and distortion of history.
</p>

<p>
J. G. Frazer.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cambridge</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>4th May 1912</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Dionysus.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Death and
resurrection
of
Oriental
gods of
vegetation.
The Dying
and Reviving
god of
vegetation
in ancient
Greece.</note>
In the preceding part of this work we saw that in antiquity
the civilised nations of western Asia and Egypt
pictured to themselves the changes of the seasons, and
particularly the annual growth and decay of vegetation,
as episodes in the life of gods, whose mournful death
and happy resurrection they celebrated with dramatic
rites of alternate lamentation and rejoicing. But if the
celebration was in form dramatic, it was in substance
magical; that is to say, it was intended, on the principles
of sympathetic magic, to ensure the vernal regeneration of
plants and the multiplication of animals, which had seemed
to be menaced by the inroads of winter. In the ancient
world, however, such ideas and such rites were by no means
confined to the Oriental peoples of Babylon and Syria,
of Phrygia and Egypt; they were not a product peculiar to
the religious mysticism of the dreamy East, but were shared
by the races of livelier fancy and more mercurial temperament
who inhabited the shores and islands of the Aegean.
We need not, with some enquirers in ancient and modern
times, suppose that these Western peoples borrowed from
the older civilisation of the Orient the conception of the
Dying and Reviving God, together with the solemn ritual,
in which that conception was dramatically set forth before
the eyes of the worshippers. More probably the resemblance
which may be traced in this respect between the religions of
the East and the West is no more than what we commonly,
though incorrectly, call a fortuitous coincidence, the effect of
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
similar causes acting alike on the similar constitution of the
human mind in different countries and under different skies.
The Greek had no need to journey into far countries to learn
the vicissitudes of the seasons, to mark the fleeting beauty
of the damask rose, the transient glory of the golden corn,
the passing splendour of the purple grapes. Year by year
in his own beautiful land he beheld, with natural regret,
the bright pomp of summer fading into the gloom and
stagnation of winter, and year by year he hailed with natural
delight the outburst of fresh life in spring. Accustomed
to personify the forces of nature, to tinge her cold abstractions
with the warm hues of imagination, to clothe her
naked realities with the gorgeous drapery of a mythic fancy,
he fashioned for himself a train of gods and goddesses, of
spirits and elves, out of the shifting panorama of the seasons,
and followed the annual fluctuations of their fortunes with
alternate emotions of cheerfulness and dejection, of gladness
and sorrow, which found their natural expression in alternate
rites of rejoicing and lamentation, of revelry and mourning.
A consideration of some of the Greek divinities who thus
died and rose again from the dead may furnish us with a
series of companion pictures to set side by side with
the sad figures of Adonis, Attis, and Osiris. We begin with
Dionysus.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dionysus,
the god of
the vine,
originally
a Thracian
deity.</note>
The god Dionysus or Bacchus is best known to us as a
personification of the vine and of the exhilaration produced
by the juice of the grape.<note place='foot'>On Dionysus in general, see L.
Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i.
659 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Fr. Lenormant, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Bacchus,</q> in Daremberg and Saglio's
<hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités Grecques
et Romaines</hi>, i. 591 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Voigt and
Thraemer, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Dionysus,</q> in W. H.
Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. u. röm.
Mythologie</hi>, i. 1029 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Rohde,
<hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903),
ii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss J. E. Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena
to the Study of Greek Religion</hi>,
Second Edition (Cambridge, 1908),
pp. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Kern, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Dionysus,</q>
in Pauly-Wissowa's <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
v. 1010 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische
Feste von religiöser Bedeutung</hi> (Leipsic,
1906), pp. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R. Farnell,
<hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>, v.
(Oxford, 1909) pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The
epithet <hi rend='italic'>Bromios</hi> bestowed on Dionysus,
and his identification with
the Thracian and Phrygian deity
Sabazius, have been adduced as evidence
that Dionysus was a god of beer
or of other cereal intoxicants before
he became a god of wine. See W.
Headlam, in <hi rend='italic'>Classical Review</hi>, xv.
(1901) p. 23; Miss J. E. Harrison,
<hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion</hi>, pp. 414-426.</note> His ecstatic worship, characterised
by wild dances, thrilling music, and tipsy excess, appears to
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
have originated among the rude tribes of Thrace, who were
notoriously addicted to drunkenness.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi>, i. p. 637 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>; Theopompus,
cited by Athenaeus, x. 60,
p. 442 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>; Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> κατασκεδάζειν;
compare Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Anabasis</hi>, vii. 3.
32. For the evidence of the Thracian
origin of Dionysus, see the writers
cited in the preceding note, especially
Dr. L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> v. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Compare W. Ridgeway, <hi rend='italic'>The Origin
of Tragedy</hi> (Cambridge, 1910), pp.
10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Its mystic doctrines
and extravagant rites were essentially foreign to the clear
intelligence and sober temperament of the Greek race. Yet
appealing as it did to that love of mystery and that proneness
to revert to savagery which seem to be innate in most
men, the religion spread like wildfire through Greece until
the god whom Homer hardly deigned to notice had become
the most popular figure of the pantheon. The resemblance
which his story and his ceremonies present to those of
Osiris have led some enquirers both in ancient and modern
times to hold that Dionysus was merely a disguised Osiris,
imported directly from Egypt into Greece.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 49; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 97. 4; P. Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Le Culte
de Dionyse en Attique</hi> (Paris, 1904),
pp. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 159 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de
l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres</hi>,
xxxvii.).</note> But the great
preponderance of evidence points to his Thracian origin,
and the similarity of the two worships is sufficiently
explained by the similarity of the ideas and customs on
which they were founded.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dionysus
a god of
trees, especially
of
fruit-trees.</note>
While the vine with its clusters was the most characteristic
manifestation of Dionysus, he was also a god of trees
in general. Thus we are told that almost all the Greeks
sacrificed to <q>Dionysus of the tree.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> v. 3:
Διονύσῳ δὲ δενδρίτῃ πάντες, ὡς ἔπος
εἰπεῖν, Ἕλληνες θύουσιν.</note> In Boeotia one of
his titles was <q>Dionysus in the tree.</q><note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἔνδενδρος.</note> His image was
often merely an upright post, without arms, but draped in
a mantle, with a bearded mask to represent the head, and
with leafy boughs projecting from the head or body to shew
the nature of the deity.<note place='foot'>See the pictures of his images,
drawn from ancient vases, in C.
Bötticher's <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus der Hellenen</hi>
(Berlin, 1856), plates 42, 43, 43 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>,
43 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 44; Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
des Antiquités Grecques et
Romaines</hi>, i. 361, 626 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On a vase his rude effigy is
depicted appearing out of a low tree or bush.<note place='foot'>Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 626.</note> At Magnesia
on the Maeander an image of Dionysus is said to have
been found in a plane-tree, which had been broken by the
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
wind.<note place='foot'>P. Wendland und O. Kern,
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Geschichte der griechischen
Philosophie und Religion</hi> (Berlin,
1895), pp. 79 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil
d' Inscriptions Grecques</hi> (Brussels,
1900), No. 856.</note> He was the patron of cultivated trees;<note place='foot'>Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
30.</note> prayers were
offered to him that he would make the trees grow;<note place='foot'>Pindar, quoted by Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 35.</note> and he
was especially honoured by husbandmen, chiefly fruit-growers,
who set up an image of him, in the shape of a natural tree-stump,
in their orchards.<note place='foot'>Maximus Tyrius, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertat.</hi> viii. 1.</note> He was said to have discovered
all tree-fruits, amongst which apples and figs are particularly
mentioned;<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, iii. chs. 14 and 23,
pp. 78 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, 82 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> and he was referred to as <q>well-fruited,</q>
<q>he of the green fruit,</q> and <q>making the fruit to grow.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, Hymn l. 4. liii. 8.</note>
One of his titles was <q>teeming</q> or <q>bursting</q> (as of sap
or blossoms);<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Var. Hist.</hi> iii. 41;
Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Φλέω[ς]. Compare
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> v. 8. 3.</note> and there was a Flowery Dionysus in Attica
and at Patrae in Achaia.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 31. 4; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vii. 21.
6.</note> The Athenians sacrificed to him
for the prosperity of the fruits of the land.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 636, vol.
ii. p. 435, τῶν καρπῶν τῶν ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ.
However, the words may equally well
refer to the cereal crops.</note> Amongst the
trees particularly sacred to him, in addition to the vine,
was the pine-tree.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> v. 3.</note> The Delphic oracle commanded the
Corinthians to worship a particular pine-tree <q>equally with
the god,</q> so they made two images of Dionysus out of it,
with red faces and gilt bodies.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 2. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Pausanias
does not mention the kind of tree;
but from Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 1064
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, and Philostratus, <hi rend='italic'>Imag.</hi> i. 17
(18), we may infer that it was a pine,
though Theocritus (xxvi. 11) speaks of
it as a mastich-tree.</note> In art a wand, tipped with
a pine-cone, is commonly carried by the god or his
worshippers.<note place='foot'>Müller-Wieseler, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der
alten Kunst</hi>, ii. pll. xxxii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A.
Baumeister, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler des klassischen
Altertums</hi>, i. figures 489, 491, 492,
495. Compare F. Lenormant, in
Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des
Antiquités Grecques et Romaines</hi>, i.
623; Ch. F. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>
(Königsberg, 1829), p. 700.</note> Again, the ivy and the fig-tree were especially
associated with him. In the Attic township of Acharnae
there was a Dionysus Ivy;<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 31. 6.</note> at Lacedaemon there was a
Fig Dionysus; and in Naxos, where figs were called <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>meilicha</foreign>,
there was a Dionysus Meilichios, the face of whose image
was made of fig-wood.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, iii. 14, p. 78 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dionysus
as a god of
agriculture
and the
corn.
The winnowing-fan
as an emblem
of
Dionysus.</note>
Further, there are indications, few but significant, that
Dionysus was conceived as a deity of agriculture and the
corn. He is spoken of as himself doing the work of a
husbandman:<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> i. 10, Δίονυσος
γεωργεῖ.</note> he is reported to have been the first to yoke
oxen to the plough, which before had been dragged by hand
alone; and some people found in this tradition the clue to
the bovine shape in which, as we shall see, the god was
often supposed to present himself to his worshippers. Thus
guiding the ploughshare and scattering the seed as he went,
Dionysus is said to have eased the labour of the husbandman.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, iii. 64. 1-3, iv.
4. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the agricultural aspect of
Dionysus, see L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults
of the Greek States</hi>, v. (Oxford, 1909)
pp. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Further, we are told that in the land of the Bisaltae,
a Thracian tribe, there was a great and fair sanctuary
of Dionysus, where at his festival a bright light shone
forth at night as a token of an abundant harvest vouchsafed
by the deity; but if the crops were to fail that year,
the mystic light was not seen, darkness brooded over the
sanctuary as at other times.<note place='foot'>[Aristotle,] <hi rend='italic'>Mirab. Auscult.</hi> 122
(p. 842 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, ed. Im. Bekker, Berlin
edition).</note> Moreover, among the emblems
of Dionysus was the winnowing-fan, that is the large open
shovel-shaped basket, which down to modern times has been
used by farmers to separate the grain from the chaff by
tossing the corn in the air. This simple agricultural instrument
figured in the mystic rites of Dionysus; indeed the
god is traditionally said to have been placed at birth in a
winnowing-fan as in a cradle: in art he is represented as an
infant so cradled; and from these traditions and representations
he derived the epithet of <foreign rend='italic'>Liknites</foreign>, that is, <q>He of the
Winnowing-fan.</q><note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 166;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35. The
literary and monumental evidence as
to the winnowing-fan in the myth and
ritual of Dionysus has been collected
and admirably interpreted by Miss J.
E. Harrison in her article <q>Mystica
Vannus Iacchi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, xxiii. (1903) pp. 292-324.
Compare her <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study
of Greek Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Cambridge, 1908),
pp. 517 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> I must refer the reader
to these works for full details on the
subject. In the passage of Servius
referred to the reading is somewhat
uncertain; in his critical edition G.
Thilo reads λικμητὴν and λικμὸς instead
of the usual λικνιτὴν and λικνόν. But
the variation does not affect the meaning.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
winnowing-fan
to
cradle
infants. The winnowing-fan
sometimes
intended to
avert evil
spirits from
children.</note>
At first sight this symbolism might be explained
very simply and naturally by supposing that the divine
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
infant cradled in the winnowing-fan was identified with
the corn which it is the function of the instrument to
winnow and sift. Yet against this identification it may be
urged with reason that the use of a winnowing-fan as a
cradle was not peculiar to Dionysus; it was a regular
practice with the ancient Greeks to place their infants in
winnowing-fans as an omen of wealth and fertility for the
future life of the children.<note place='foot'>Ἐν γὰρ λείκνοις τὸ παλαιὸν κατεκοίμιζον
τὰ Βρέφη πλοῦτον καὶ καρπούς
οἰωνιζόμενοι, Scholiast on Callimachus,
i. 48 (<hi rend='italic'>Callimachea</hi>, edidit O. Schneider,
Leipsic, 1870-1873, vol. i. p. 109).</note> Customs of the same sort have
been observed, apparently for similar reasons, by other
peoples in other lands. For example, in Java it is or used
to be customary to place every child at birth in a bamboo
basket like the sieve or winnowing-basket which Javanese
farmers use for separating the rice from the chaff.<note place='foot'>T. S. Raffles, <hi rend='italic'>History of Java</hi>
(London, 1817), i. 323; C. F. Winter,
<q>Instellingen, Gewoontenen Gebruiken
der Javanen te Soerakarta,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neêrlands Indie</hi>, Vijfde Jaargang,
Eerste Deel (1843), p. 695; P. J. Veth,
<hi rend='italic'>Java</hi> (Haarlem, 1875-1884), i. 639.</note> It is
the midwife who places the child in the basket, and as she
does so she suddenly knocks with the palms of both hands
on the basket in order that the child may not be timid and
fearful. Then she addresses the child thus: <q>Cry not, for
Njaï-among and Kaki-among</q> (two spirits) <q>are watching
over you.</q> Next she addresses these two spirits, saying,
<q>Bring not your grandchild to the road, lest he be trampled
by a horse; bring him not to the bank of the river, lest he
fall into the river.</q> The object of the ceremony is said to
be that these two spirits should always and everywhere guard
the child.<note place='foot'>C. Poensen, <q>Iets over de kleeding
der Javanen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van
wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xx. (1876) pp. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On the first anniversary of a child's birthday the
Chinese of Foo-Chow set the little one in a large bamboo
sieve, such as farmers employ in winnowing grain, and in the
sieve they place along with the child a variety of articles,
such as fruits, gold or silver ornaments, a set of money-scales,
books, a pencil, pen, ink, paper, and so on, and they draw
omens of the child's future career from the object which it
first handles and plays with. Thus, if the infant first grasps
the money-scale, he will be wealthy; if he seizes on a book,
he will be learned, and so forth.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Doolittle, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life of the
Chinese</hi>, edited and revised by the
Rev. Paxton Hood (London, 1868),
pp. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Bilaspore district
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
of India it is customary for well-to-do people to place a newborn
infant in a winnowing-fan filled with rice and afterwards
to give the grain to the nurse in attendance.<note place='foot'>Rev. E. M. Gordon, <q>Some Notes
concerning the People of Mungēli
Tahsīl, Bilaspur District,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, lxxi., Part
iii. (Calcutta, 1903) p. 74; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Folk Tales</hi> (London, 1908), p. 41.</note> In
Upper Egypt a newly-born babe is immediately laid upon a
corn-sieve and corn is scattered around it; moreover, on the
seventh day after birth the infant is carried on a sieve through
the whole house, while the midwife scatters wheat, barley,
pease and salt. The intention of these ceremonies is
said to be to avert evil spirits from the child,<note place='foot'>C. B. Klunzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Bilder aus
Oberägypten</hi> (Stuttgart, 1877), pp. 181,
182; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Upper Egypt, its People and
Products</hi> (London, 1878), pp. 185,
186.</note> and a like
motive is assigned by other peoples for the practice of
placing newborn infants in a winnowing-basket or corn-sieve.
For example, in the Punjaub, when several children of a
family have died in succession, a new baby will sometimes
be put at birth into an old winnowing-basket (<foreign rend='italic'>chhaj</foreign>) along
with the sweepings of the house, and so dragged out into
the yard; such a child may, like Dionysus, in after life be
known by the name of Winnowing-basket (<foreign rend='italic'>Chhajju</foreign>) or
Dragged (<foreign rend='italic'>Ghasitâ</foreign>).<note place='foot'>R. C. Temple, <q>Opprobrious
Names,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, x. (1881)
pp. 331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare H. A. Rose,
<q>Hindu Birth Observances in the
Punjab,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxvii. (1907) p. 234.
See also <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>,
vol. iii. August 1886, § 768, pp.
184 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>The winnowing fan in
which a newly-born child is laid, is
used on the fifth day for the worship
of Satwáí. This makes it impure, and
it is henceforward used only for the
house-sweepings.</q></note> The object of treating the child in this
way seems to be to save its life by deceiving the spirits, who
are supposed to have carried off its elder brothers and sisters;
these malevolent beings are on the look-out for the new baby,
but they will never think of raking for it in the dust-bin,
that being the last place where they would expect to find
the hope of the family. The same may perhaps be the
intention of a ceremony observed by the Gaolis of the
Deccan. As soon as a child is born, it is bathed and then
placed on a sieve for a few minutes. On the fifth day
the sieve, with a lime and <foreign rend='italic'>pan</foreign> leaves on it, is removed
outside the house and then, after the worship of Chetti
has been performed, the sieve is thrown away on the
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
road.<note place='foot'>Lieut.-Colonel Gunthorpe, <q>On
the Ghosí or Gaddí Gaolís of the Deccan,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Society of Bombay</hi>, i. 45.</note> Again, the same notion of rescuing the child from
dangerous spirits comes out very clearly in a similar
custom observed by the natives of Laos, a province of
Siam. These people <q>believe that an infant is the child,
not of its parents, but of the spirits, and in this belief they
go through the following formalities. As soon as an infant
is born it is bathed and dressed, laid upon a rice-sieve, and
placed&mdash;by the grandmother if present, if not, by the next
near female relative&mdash;at the head of the stairs or of the
ladder leading to the house. The person performing this
duty calls out in a loud tone to the spirits to come and take
the child away to-day, or for ever after to let it alone;
at the same moment she stamps violently on the floor to
frighten the child, or give it a jerk, and make it cry. If it
does not cry this is regarded as an evil omen. If, on the
other hand, it follows the ordinary laws of nature and begins
to exercise its vocal organs, it is supposed to have a happy
and prosperous life before it. Sometimes the spirits do
come and take the infant away, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> it dies before it is twenty-four
hours old, but, to prevent such a calamity, strings are
tied round its wrists on the first night after its birth, and
if it sickens or is feeble the spirit-doctors are called in to
prescribe certain offerings to be made to keep away the very
spirits who, only a few hours previously, were ceremoniously
called upon to come and carry the child off. On the day
after its birth the child is regarded as being the property no
longer of the spirits, who could have taken it if they had
wanted it, but of the parents, who forthwith sell it to some
relation for a nominal sum&mdash;an eighth or a quarter of a
rupee perhaps. This again is a further guarantee against
molestation by the spirits, who apparently are regarded as
honest folk that would not stoop to take what has been
bought and paid for.</q><note place='foot'>C. Bock, <hi rend='italic'>Temples and Elephants</hi>
(London, 1884), pp. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
winnowing-fan
to
avert evil
from
children
in India,
Madagascar,
and
China. Karen
ceremony
of fanning
away evils
from
children.</note>
A like intention of averting evil in some shape from a
child is assigned in other cases of the same custom. Thus
in Travancore, <q>if an infant is observed to distort its limbs
as if in pain, it is supposed to be under the pressure of some
one who has stooped over it, to relieve which the mother
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
places it with a nut-cracker on a winnowing fan and shakes
it three or four times.</q><note place='foot'>S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>Native Life in Travancore</hi>
(London, 1883), p. 213.</note> Again, among the Tanala people
of Madagascar almost all children born in the unlucky month
of Faosa are buried alive in the forest. But if the parents
resolve to let the child live, they must call in the aid of a
diviner, who performs a ceremony for averting the threatened
ill-luck. The child is placed in a winnowing-fan along with
certain herbs. Further, the diviner takes herbs of the same
sort, a worn-out spade, and an axe, fastens them to the
father's spear, and sets the spear up in the ground. Then
the child is bathed in water which has been medicated with
some of the same herbs. Finally the diviner says: <q>The
worn-out spade to the grandchild; may it (the child) not
despoil its father, may it not despoil its mother, may it not
despoil the children; let it be good.</q> This ceremony, we
are told, <q>puts an end to the child's evil days, and the father
gets the spear to put away all evil. The child then joins its
father and mother; its evil days are averted, and the water
and the other things are buried, for they account them evil.</q><note place='foot'>J. Richardson, <q>Tanala Customs,
Superstitions, and Beliefs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar Magazine,
Reprint of the First Four Numbers</hi>
(Antananarivo, 1885), pp. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Similarly the ancient Greeks used to bury, or throw into the
sea, or deposit at cross-roads, the things that had been
used in ceremonies of purification, no doubt because the
things were supposed to be tainted by the evil which had
been transferred to them in the rites.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 31. 8; K. F. Hermann,
<hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der gottesdienstlichen
Alterthümer der Griechen</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Heidelberg,
1858), pp. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 23, 25.</note> Another example of
the use of a winnowing-fan in what may be called a purificatory
ceremony is furnished by the practice of the Chinese of Foo-Chow.
A lad who is suffering from small-pox is made to
squat in a large winnowing sieve. On his head is placed a
piece of red cloth, and on the cloth are laid some parched
beans, which are then allowed to roll off. As the name for
beans, pronounced in the local dialect, is identical with the
common name for small-pox, and as moreover the scars left
by the pustules are thought to resemble beans, it appears to
be imagined that just as the beans roll off the boy's head, so
will the pustules vanish from his body without leaving a
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
trace behind.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Doolittle, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life of the
Chinese</hi>, edited and revised by the Rev.
Paxton Hood (London, 1868), pp. 114
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The beans used in the ceremony
had previously been placed before an
image of the goddess of small-pox.</note> Thus the cure depends on the principle
of homoeopathic magic. Perhaps on the same principle a
winnowing-fan is employed in the ceremony from a notion
that it will help to waft or fan away the disease like chaff
from the grain. We may compare a purificatory ceremony
observed by the Karens of Burma at the naming of a new-born
child. Amongst these people <q rend='pre'>children are supposed
to come into the world defiled, and unless that defilement is
removed, they will be unfortunate, and unsuccessful in their
undertakings. An Elder takes a thin splint of bamboo,
and, tying a noose at one end, he fans it down the child's
arm, saying:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Fan away ill luck, fan away ill success:</hi></q></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan away inability, fan away unskilfulness:</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan away slow growth, fan away difficulty of growth:</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan away stuntedness, fan away puniness:</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan away drowsiness, fan away stupidity:</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan away debasedness, fan away wretchedness:</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><q rend='none'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Fan away the whole completely.</hi></q></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Elder now changes his motion and fans up the child's
arm, saying:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Fan on power, fan on influence:</hi></q></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan on the paddy bin, fan on the paddy barn:</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fan on followers, fan on dependants:</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Fan on good things, fan on appropriate things.</hi></q></q><note place='foot'>Rev. F. Mason, D.D., <q>Physical
Character of the Karens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, New
Series, No. cxxxi. (Calcutta, 1866),
pp. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Among the
reasons for
the use of
the winnowing-fan
in birth-rites
may
have been
the wish
to avert
evils and
to promote
fertility and
growth.</note>
Thus in some of the foregoing instances the employment
of the winnowing-fan may have been suggested by the proper
use of the implement as a means of separating the corn from
the chaff, the same operation being extended by analogy to
rid men of evils of various sorts which would otherwise adhere
to them like husks to the grain. It was in this way that
the ancients explained the use of the winnowing-fan in the
mysteries.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 166:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et vannus Iacchi.... Mystica autem
Bacchi ideo ait, quod Liberi patris sacra
ad purgationem animae pertinebant: et
sic homines ejus mysteriis purgabantur,
sicut vannis frumenta purgantur.</foreign></q></note> But one motive, and perhaps the original one,
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
for setting a newborn child in a winnowing-fan and surrounding
it with corn was probably the wish to communicate to
the infant, on the principle of sympathetic magic, the fertility
and especially the power of growth possessed by the grain.
This was in substance the explanation which W. Mannhardt
gave of the custom.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <q>Kind und Korn,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi> (Strasburg,
1884), pp. 351-374.</note> He rightly insisted on the analogy
which many peoples, and in particular the ancient Greeks,
have traced between the sowing of seed and the begetting
of children,<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 351
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and he confirmed his view of the function of
the winnowing-fan in these ceremonies by aptly comparing
a German custom of sowing barley or flax seed over weakly
and stunted children in the belief that this will make them
grow with the growth of the barley or the flax.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 372,
citing A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volks-aberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), p. 339, § 543;
L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und Sagen
aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi> (Oldenburg,
1867), i. 81.</note> An
Esthonian mode of accomplishing the same object is to set
the child in the middle of a plot of ground where a sower is
sowing hemp and to leave the little one there till the sowing
is finished; after that they imagine that the child will shoot
up in stature like the hemp which has just been sown.<note place='foot'>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <hi rend='italic'>Der Ehsten
abergläubische Gebräuche</hi> (St. Petersburg,
1854), p. 61. This custom is
also cited by Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
winnowing-fan
in
the rites of
Dionysus.</note>
With the foregoing evidence before us of a widespread
custom of placing newborn children in winnowing-fans we
clearly cannot argue that Dionysus must necessarily have
been a god of the corn because Greek tradition and Greek
art represent him as an infant cradled in a winnowing-fan.
The argument would prove too much, for it would apply
equally to all the infants that have been so cradled in all
parts of the world. We cannot even press the argument
drawn from the surname <q>He of the Winnowing-fan</q> which
was borne by Dionysus, since we have seen that similar
names are borne for similar reasons in India by persons who
have no claim whatever to be regarded as deities of the corn.
Yet when all necessary deductions have been made on this
score, the association of Dionysus with the winnowing-fan
appears to be too intimate to be explained away as a mere
reminiscence of a practice to which every Greek baby, whether
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
human or divine, had to submit. That practice would hardly
account either for the use of the winnowing-fan in the
mysteries or for the appearance of the implement, filled with
fruitage of various kinds, on the monuments which set forth
the ritual of Dionysus.<note place='foot'>Miss J. E. Harrison, <q>Mystica
Vannus Iacchi,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, xxiii. (1903) pp. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 518 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R. Farnell,
<hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>, v.
(Oxford, 1909) p. 243.</note> This last emblem points plainly to
a conception of the god as a personification of the fruits of
the earth in general; and as if to emphasise the idea of
fecundity conveyed by such a symbol there sometimes
appears among the fruits in the winnowing-fan an effigy of
the male organ of generation. The prominent place which
that effigy occupied in the worship of Dionysus<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 48, 49; Clement of
Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 34, pp. 29-30,
ed. Potter; Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 19,
vol. i. p. 32; M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Studia
de Dionysiis Atticis</hi> (Lund, 1900), pp.
90 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of
the Greek States</hi>, v. 125, 195, 205.</note> hints broadly,
if it does not strictly prove, that to the Greek mind the
god stood for the powers of fertility in general, animal as
well as vegetable. In the thought of the ancients no sharp
line of distinction divided the fertility of animals from the
fertility of plants; rather the two ideas met and blended
in a nebulous haze. We need not wonder, therefore, that
the same coarse but expressive emblem figured conspicuously
in the ritual of Father Liber, the Italian counterpart of
Dionysus, who in return for the homage paid to the symbol
of his creative energy was believed to foster the growth of
the crops and to guard the fields against the powers of evil.<note place='foot'>Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, vii. 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Myth of
the death
and resurrection
of
Dionysus. Legend
that the
infant
Dionysus
occupied
for a short
time the
throne of
his father
Zeus. Death and
resurrection
of
Dionysus
represented
in
his rites.</note>
Like the other gods of vegetation whom we considered in
the last volume, Dionysus was believed to have died a violent
death, but to have been brought to life again; and his sufferings,
death, and resurrection were enacted in his sacred rites.
His tragic story is thus told by the poet Nonnus. Zeus in
the form of a serpent visited Persephone, and she bore him
Zagreus, that is, Dionysus, a horned infant. Scarcely was
he born, when the babe mounted the throne of his father
Zeus and mimicked the great god by brandishing the
lightning in his tiny hand. But he did not occupy the
throne long; for the treacherous Titans, their faces whitened
with chalk, attacked him with knives while he was looking
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
at himself in a mirror. For a time he evaded their assaults
by turning himself into various shapes, assuming the likeness
successively of Zeus and Cronus, of a young man, of a lion,
a horse, and a serpent. Finally, in the form of a bull, he
was cut to pieces by the murderous knives of his enemies.<note place='foot'>Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> vi. 155-205.</note>
His Cretan myth, as related by Firmicus Maternus, ran thus.
He was said to have been the bastard son of Jupiter, a
Cretan king. Going abroad, Jupiter transferred the throne and
sceptre to the youthful Dionysus, but, knowing that his wife
Juno cherished a jealous dislike of the child, he entrusted
Dionysus to the care of guards upon whose fidelity he
believed he could rely. Juno, however, bribed the guards,
and amusing the child with rattles and a cunningly-wrought
looking-glass lured him into an ambush, where her satellites,
the Titans, rushed upon him, cut him limb from limb, boiled
his body with various herbs, and ate it. But his sister
Minerva, who had shared in the deed, kept his heart and
gave it to Jupiter on his return, revealing to him the whole
history of the crime. In his rage, Jupiter put the Titans to
death by torture, and, to soothe his grief for the loss of his
son, made an image in which he enclosed the child's heart,
and then built a temple in his honour.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 6.</note> In this version a
Euhemeristic turn has been given to the myth by representing
Jupiter and Juno (Zeus and Hera) as a king and
queen of Crete. The guards referred to are the mythical
Curetes who danced a war-dance round the infant Dionysus,
as they are said to have done round the infant Zeus.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 17. Compare Ch. A. Lobeck,
<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, pp. 1111 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Very noteworthy is the legend, recorded both by Nonnus
and Firmicus, that in his infancy Dionysus occupied for a
short time the throne of his father Zeus. So Proclus tells
us that <q>Dionysus was the last king of the gods appointed
by Zeus. For his father set him on the kingly throne, and
placed in his hand the sceptre, and made him king of all the
gods of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Proclus on Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Cratylus</hi>, p. 59,
quoted by E. Abel, <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, p. 228.
Compare Chr. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
pp. 552 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Such traditions point to a custom of
temporarily investing the king's son with the royal dignity
as a preliminary to sacrificing him instead of his father.
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
Pomegranates were supposed to have sprung from the blood
of Dionysus, as anemones from the blood of Adonis and
violets from the blood of Attis: hence women refrained
from eating seeds of pomegranates at the festival of the
Thesmophoria.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 19. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> ii. 22; Scholiast
on Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dial. Meretr.</hi> vii. p. 280,
ed. H. Rabe.</note> According to some, the severed limbs of
Dionysus were pieced together, at the command of Zeus, by
Apollo, who buried them on Parnassus.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 18; Proclus on Plato's <hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi>, iii.
p. 200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, quoted by Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
p. 562, and by Abel, <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>,
p. 234. Others said that the mangled
body was pieced together, not by Apollo
but by Rhea (Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae
Graecae Compendium</hi>, 30).</note> The grave of
Dionysus was shewn in the Delphic temple beside a golden
statue of Apollo.<note place='foot'>Ch. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, pp.
572 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 3. For
a conjectural restoration of the temple,
based on ancient authorities and an
examination of the scanty remains, see
an article by J. H. Middleton, in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic Studies</hi>, ix. (1888)
pp. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The ruins of the temple
have now been completely excavated
by the French.</note> However, according to another account,
the grave of Dionysus was at Thebes, where he is said to
have been torn in pieces.<note place='foot'>S. Clemens Romanus, <hi rend='italic'>Recognitiones</hi>,
x. 24 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia
Graeca</hi>, i. col. 1434).</note> Thus far the resurrection of the
slain god is not mentioned, but in other versions of the myth
it is variously related. According to one version, which
represented Dionysus as a son of Zeus and Demeter, his
mother pieced together his mangled limbs and made him
young again.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, iii. 62.</note> In others it is simply said that shortly after
his burial he rose from the dead and ascended up to heaven;<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Somn.
Scip.</hi> i. 12. 12; <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores rerum
mythicarum Latini tres Romae nuper
reperti</hi> (commonly referred to as
<hi rend='italic'>Mythographi Vaticani</hi>), ed. G. H.
Bode (Cellis, 1834), iii. 12. 5, p. 246;
Origen, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Celsum</hi>, iv. 17 (vol. i.
p. 286, ed. P. Koetschau).</note>
or that Zeus raised him up as he lay mortally wounded;<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> ix. 4.</note> or
that Zeus swallowed the heart of Dionysus and then begat
him afresh by Semele,<note place='foot'>Proclus, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Minerva</hi>,
quoted by Ch. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
p. 561; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, ed. E. Abel,
p. 235.</note> who in the common legend figures
as mother of Dionysus. Or, again, the heart was pounded
up and given in a portion to Semele, who thereby conceived
him.<note place='foot'>Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>, 167.</note>
</p>

<p>
Turning from the myth to the ritual, we find that the
Cretans celebrated a biennial<note place='foot'>The festivals of Dionysus were
biennial in many places. See G. F.
Schömann, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Alterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 524 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (The terms for the festival
were τριετηρίς, τριετηρικός, both terms
of the series being included in the
numeration, in accordance with the
ancient mode of reckoning.) Perhaps
the festivals were formerly annual and
the period was afterwards lengthened,
as has happened with other festivals.
See W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
172, 175, 491, 533 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 598. Some
of the festivals of Dionysus, however,
were annual. Dr. Farnell has conjectured
that the biennial period in
many Greek festivals is to be explained
by <q>the original shifting of land-cultivation
which is frequent in early
society owing to the backwardness of
the agricultural processes; and which
would certainly be consecrated by a
special ritual attached to the god of the
soil.</q> See L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults
of the Greek States</hi>, v. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> festival at which the passion
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
of Dionysus was represented in every detail. All that he
had done or suffered in his last moments was enacted before
the eyes of his worshippers, who tore a live bull to pieces
with their teeth and roamed the woods with frantic shouts.
In front of them was carried a casket supposed to contain
the sacred heart of Dionysus, and to the wild music of
flutes and cymbals they mimicked the rattles by which the
infant god had been lured to his doom.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore
profanarum religionum</hi>, 6.</note> Where the
resurrection formed part of the myth, it also was acted at
the rites,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mythographi Vaticani</hi>, ed. G. H.
Bode, iii. 12. 5, p. 246.</note> and it even appears that a general doctrine of
resurrection, or at least of immortality, was inculcated on
the worshippers; for Plutarch, writing to console his wife on
the death of their infant daughter, comforts her with the
thought of the immortality of the soul as taught by tradition
and revealed in the mysteries of Dionysus.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Consol. ad uxor.</hi> 10.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De
E Delphico</hi>, 9; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De esu carnium</hi>, i. 7.</note> A different
form of the myth of the death and resurrection of Dionysus
is that he descended into Hades to bring up his mother
Semele from the dead.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 31. 2 and 37. 5;
Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 5. 3.</note> The local Argive tradition was
that he went down through the Alcyonian lake; and his
return from the lower world, in other words his resurrection,
was annually celebrated on the spot by the Argives, who
summoned him from the water by trumpet blasts, while
they threw a lamb into the lake as an offering to the
warder of the dead.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 37. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi>
iv. 6. 2.</note> Whether this was a spring festival
does not appear, but the Lydians certainly celebrated the
advent of Dionysus in spring; the god was supposed to
bring the season with him.<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> iii. 6, xiv. 7.</note> Deities of vegetation, who are
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
supposed to pass a certain portion of each year under ground,
naturally come to be regarded as gods of the lower world
or of the dead. Both Dionysus and Osiris were so conceived.<note place='foot'>For Dionysus in this capacity see
F. Lenormant in Daremberg et Saglio,
<hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités Grecques
et Romaines</hi>, i. 632. For Osiris, see
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
pp. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dionysus
represented
in
the form
of a bull.</note>
A feature in the mythical character of Dionysus, which
at first sight appears inconsistent with his nature as a deity
of vegetation, is that he was often conceived and represented
in animal shape, especially in the form, or at least with
the horns, of a bull. Thus he is spoken of as <q>cow-born,</q>
<q>bull,</q> <q>bull-shaped,</q> <q>bull-faced,</q> <q>bull-browed,</q> <q>bull-horned,</q>
<q>horn-bearing,</q> <q>two-horned,</q> <q>horned.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Graec.</hi> 36; Athenaeus, xi. 51,
p. 476 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; Clement of Alexandria,
<hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 16; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, Hymn xxx.
<hi rend='italic'>vv.</hi> 3, 4, xlv. 1, lii. 2, liii. 8;
Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 99; Scholiast on
Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 357; Nicander,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexipharmaca</hi>, 31; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchus</hi>,
2. The title Εἰραφιώτης applied to
Dionysus (<hi rend='italic'>Homeric Hymns</hi>, xxxiv. 2;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, iii. 17;
Dionysius, <hi rend='italic'>Perieg.</hi> 576; <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum
Magnum</hi>, p. 371. 57) is etymologically
equivalent to the Sanscrit <foreign lang='sa' rend='italic'>varsabha</foreign>,
<q>a bull,</q> as I was informed by my
lamented friend the late R. A. Neil of
Pembroke College, Cambridge.</note> He
was believed to appear, at least occasionally, as a bull.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 920 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
1017; Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> vi. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> His
images were often, as at Cyzicus, made in bull shape,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35;
Athenaeus, xi. 51, p. 476 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> or
with bull horns;<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, iii. 64. 2, iv. 4.
2; Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
30.</note> and he was painted with horns.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, iii. 64. 2; J. Tzetzes,
<hi rend='italic'>Schol. on Lycophron</hi>, 209, 1236;
Philostratus, <hi rend='italic'>Imagines</hi>, i. 14 (15).</note> Types
of the horned Dionysus are found amongst the surviving
monuments of antiquity.<note place='foot'>Müller-Wieseler, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der
alten Kunst</hi>, ii. pl. xxxiii.; Daremberg
et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités
Grecques et Romaines</hi>, i. 619 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 631;
W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon d. griech. u.
röm. Mythologie</hi>, i. 1149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F.
Imhoof-Blumer, <q>Coin-types of some
Kilikian Cities,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, xviii. (1898) p. 165.</note> On one statuette he appears clad
in a bull's hide, the head, horns, and hoofs hanging down
behind.<note place='foot'>F. G. Welcker, <hi rend='italic'>Alte Denkmäler</hi>
(Göttingen, 1849-1864), v. taf. 2.</note> Again, he is represented as a child with clusters
of grapes round his brow, and a calf's head, with sprouting
horns, attached to the back of his head.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Archaeologische Zeitung</hi>, ix.
(1851) pl. xxxiii., with Gerhard's
remarks, pp. 371-373.</note> On a red-figured
vase the god is portrayed as a calf-headed child seated on a
woman's lap.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Gazette Archéologique</hi>, v. (1879)
pl. 3.</note> The people of Cynaetha in north-western
Arcadia held a festival of Dionysus in winter, when men,
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
who had greased their bodies with oil for the occasion, used
to pick out a bull from the herd and carry it to the sanctuary
of the god. Dionysus was supposed to inspire their choice
of the particular bull,<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 19. 2.</note> which probably represented the deity
himself; for at his festivals he was believed to appear in
bull form. The women of Elis hailed him as a bull, and
prayed him to come with his bull's foot. They sang, <q>Come
hither, Dionysus, to thy holy temple by the sea; come with
the Graces to thy temple, rushing with thy bull's foot, O
goodly bull, O goodly bull!</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Graecae</hi>, 36;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35.</note> The Bacchanals of Thrace
wore horns in imitation of their god.<note place='foot'>J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. on Lycophron</hi>,
1236.</note> According to the
myth, it was in the shape of a bull that he was torn to
pieces by the Titans;<note place='foot'>Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> vi. 205.</note> and the Cretans, when they acted
the sufferings and death of Dionysus, tore a live bull to
pieces with their teeth.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 6.</note> Indeed, the rending and devouring
of live bulls and calves appear to have been a regular feature
of the Dionysiac rites.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 735 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 357.</note> When we consider the practice of
portraying the god as a bull or with some of the features of
the animal, the belief that he appeared in bull form to his
worshippers at the sacred rites, and the legend that in bull
form he had been torn in pieces, we cannot doubt that in
rending and devouring a live bull at his festival the
worshippers of Dionysus believed themselves to be killing
the god, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dionysus
as a goat. Live goats
rent and
devoured
by his worshippers.</note>
Another animal whose form Dionysus assumed was the
goat. One of his names was <q>Kid.</q><note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἔριφος ὁ Διόνυσος,
on which there is a marginal gloss
ὁ μικρὸς αἴξ, ὁ ἐν τῷ ἔαρι φαινόμενος,
ἤγουν ὁ πρώϊμος; Stephanus Byzantius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἀκρώρεια.</note> At Athens and at
Hermion he was worshipped under the title of <q>the one of
the Black Goatskin,</q> and a legend ran that on a certain
occasion he had appeared clad in the skin from which he
took the title.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 35. 1; Scholiast on
Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Acharn.</hi> 146; <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum
Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἀπατούρια, p. 118.
54 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> Ἀπατούρια and
μελαναίγιδα Διόνυσον; Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi>
xxvii. 302. Compare Conon, <hi rend='italic'>Narrat.</hi>
39, where for Μελανθίδῃ we should
perhaps read Μελαναίγιδι.</note> In the wine-growing district of Phlius, where
in autumn the plain is still thickly mantled with the red and
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
golden foliage of the fading vines, there stood of old a
bronze image of a goat, which the husbandmen plastered
with gold-leaf as a means of protecting their vines against
blight.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 13. 6. On their
return from Troy the Greeks are said
to have found goats and an image of
Dionysus in a cave of Euboea (Pausanias,
i. 23. 1).</note> The image probably represented the vine-god
himself. To save him from the wrath of Hera, his father
Zeus changed the youthful Dionysus into a kid;<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 4. 3.</note> and when
the gods fled to Egypt to escape the fury of Typhon,
Dionysus was turned into a goat.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> v. 329; Antoninus
Liberalis, <hi rend='italic'>Transform.</hi> 28; <hi rend='italic'>Mythographi
Vaticani</hi>, ed. G. H. Bode, i. 86, p.
29.</note> Hence when his
worshippers rent in pieces a live goat and devoured it raw,<note place='foot'>Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus nationes</hi>, v.
19. Compare Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> αἰγίζειν.
As fawns appear to have been also torn
in pieces at the rites of Dionysus
(Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> νεβρίζειν;
Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> νεβρίζων), it is
probable that the fawn was another of
the god's embodiments. But of this
there seems no direct evidence. Fawn-skins
were worn both by the god and
his worshippers (Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae
Graecae Compendium</hi>, 30). Similarly
the female Bacchanals wore goat-skins
(Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> τραγηφόροι).</note>
they must have believed that they were eating the body and
blood of the god.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom of
rending
and
devouring
animals
and men
as a religious
rite.
Ceremonial
cannibalism
among
the Indians
of British
Columbia.</note>
The custom of tearing in pieces the bodies of animals
and of men and then devouring them raw has been practised
as a religious rite by savages in modern times. We need
not therefore dismiss as a fable the testimony of antiquity
to the observance of similar rites among the frenzied
worshippers of Bacchus. An English missionary to the Coast
Indians of British Columbia has thus described a scene like
the cannibal orgies of the Bacchanals. After mentioning that
an old chief had ordered a female slave to be dragged to
the beach, murdered, and thrown into the water, he proceeds
as follows: <q>I did not see the murder, but, immediately
after, I saw crowds of people running out of those houses
near to where the corpse was thrown, and forming themselves
into groups at a good distance away. This I learnt
was from fear of what was to follow. Presently two bands
of furious wretches appeared, each headed by a man in a
state of nudity. They gave vent to the most unearthly
sounds, and the two naked men made themselves look as
unearthly as possible, proceeding in a creeping kind of
stoop, and stepping like two proud horses, at the same time
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
shooting forward each arm alternately, which they held out
at full length for a little time in the most defiant manner.
Besides this, the continual jerking their heads back, causing
their long black hair to twist about, added much to their
savage appearance. For some time they pretended to be
seeking the body, and the instant they came where it lay
they commenced screaming and rushing round it like so
many angry wolves. Finally they seized it, dragged it out
of the water, and laid it on the beach, where I was told the
naked men would commence tearing it to pieces with their
teeth. The two bands of men immediately surrounded
them, and so hid their horrid work. In a few minutes
the crowd broke into two, when each of the naked cannibals
appeared with half of the body in his hands. Separating
a few yards, they commenced, amid horrid yells, their still
more horrid feast. The sight was too terrible to behold.
I left the gallery with a depressed heart. I may mention
that the two bands of savages just alluded to belong to that
class which the whites term <q>medicine-men.</q></q> The same
writer informs us that at the winter ceremonials of these
Indians <q>the cannibal, on such occasions, is generally
supplied with two, three, or four human bodies, which he
tears to pieces before his audience. Several persons, either
from bravado or as a charm, present their arms for him
to bite. I have seen several whom he has bitten, and I hear
two have died from the effects.</q> And when corpses were
not forthcoming, these cannibals apparently seized and
devoured living people. Mr. Duncan has seen hundreds of
the Tsimshian Indians sitting in their canoes which they
had just pushed off from the shore in order to escape being
torn to pieces by a party of prowling cannibals. Others
of these Indians contented themselves with tearing dogs
to pieces, while their attendants kept up a growling noise,
or a whoop, <q>which was seconded by a screeching noise
made from an instrument which they believe to be the abode
of a spirit.</q><note place='foot'>Mr. Duncan, quoted by Commander
R. C. Mayne, <hi rend='italic'>Four Years in British
Columbia and Vancouver Island</hi> (London,
1862), pp. 284-288. The instrument
which made the screeching sound
was no doubt a bull-roarer, a flat piece
of stick whirled at the end of a string so
as to produce a droning or screaming
note according to the speed of revolution.
Such instruments are used by
the Koskimo Indians of the same
region at their cannibal and other
rites. See Fr. Boas, <q>The Social
Organization and the Secret Societies
of the Kwakiutl Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the U.S. National Museum for 1895</hi>
(Washington, 1897), pp. 610, 611.</note>
</p>

<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Religious
societies of
Cannibals
and Dog-eaters
among the
Indians of
British
Columbia. Live goats
rent in
pieces and
devoured
by fanatics
in
Morocco.</note>
Mr. Duncan's account of these savage rites has been
fully borne out by later observation. Among the Kwakiutl
Indians the Cannibals (<foreign rend='italic'>Hamatsas</foreign>) are the highest in rank of
the Secret Societies. They devour corpses, bite pieces out
of living people, and formerly ate slaves who had been
killed for the purpose. But when their fury has subsided,
they are obliged to pay compensation to the persons whom
they have bitten and to the owners of slaves whom they
have killed. The indemnity consists sometimes of blankets,
sometimes of canoes. In the latter case the tariff is fixed:
one bite, one canoe. For some time after eating human
flesh the cannibal has to observe a great many rules, which
regulate his eating and drinking, his going out and his
coming in, his clothing and his intercourse with his wife.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 437-443,
527 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 536, 537 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 579, 664; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <q>Fifth Report on the North-western
Tribes of Canada,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British
Association for 1889</hi>, pp. 54-56 (separate
reprint); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <q>Sixth Report on the
North-western Tribes of Canada,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1890</hi>, pp. 62, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate reprint).
As to the rules observed after the
eating of human flesh, see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and
the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 188-190.</note>
Similar customs prevail among other tribes of the same
coast, such as the Bella Coola, the Tsimshian, the Niska,
and the Nootka. In the Nootka tribe members of the
Panther Society tear dogs to pieces and devour them. They
wear masks armed with canine teeth.<note place='foot'>Fr. Boas, <q>The Social Organization
and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the U.S.
National Museum for 1895</hi> (Washington,
1897), pp. 649 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 658 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
in <q>Sixth Report on the North-western
Tribes of Canada,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of
the British Association for 1890</hi>, p. 51;
(separate reprint); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Seventh
Report on the North-western Tribes
of Canada,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Report of the British
Association for 1891</hi>, pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (separate
reprint); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Tenth Report on
the North-western Tribes of Canada,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1895</hi>, p. 58 (separate reprint).</note> So among the
Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands there is one
religion of cannibalism and another of dog-eating. The
cannibals in a state of frenzy, real or pretended, bite flesh
out of the extended arms of their fellow villagers. When
they issue forth with cries of <foreign rend='italic'>Hop-pop</foreign> to observe this solemn
rite, all who are of a different religious persuasion make
haste to get out of their way; but men of the cannibal creed
and of stout hearts will resolutely hold out their arms to be
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
bitten. The sect of dog-eaters cut or tear dogs to pieces
and devour some of the flesh; but they have to pay for the
dogs which they consume in their religious enthusiasm.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the
Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878</hi> (Montreal,
1880), pp. 125 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 128 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
In the performance of these savage rites the frenzied actors
are believed to be inspired by a Cannibal Spirit and a
Dog-eating Spirit respectively.<note place='foot'>J. R. Swanton, <hi rend='italic'>Contributions to
the Ethnology of the Haida</hi> (Leyden
and New York, 1905), pp. 156, 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 181 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition, Memoir of the American
Museum of Natural History</hi>). For details
as to the practice of these savage
rites among the Indian coast tribes of
British Columbia, see my <hi rend='italic'>Totemism
and Exogamy</hi> (London, 1910), iii. pp.
501, 511 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 515 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 519, 521, 526,
535 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 537, 539 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 542 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 544,
545.</note> Again, in Morocco there is
an order of saints known as Isowa or Aïsawa, followers of
Mohammed ben Isa or Aïsa of Mequinez, whose tomb is at
Fez. Every year on their founder's birthday they assemble
at his shrine or elsewhere and holding each other's hands
dance a frantic dance round a fire. <q>While the mad dance
is still proceeding, a sudden rush is made from the sanctuary,
and the dancers, like men delirious, speed away to a place
where live goats are tethered in readiness. At sight of these
animals the fury of the savage and excited crowd reaches its
height. In a few minutes the wretched animals are cut, or
rather torn to pieces, and an orgy takes place over the raw
and quivering flesh. When they seem satiated, the
Emkaddim, who is generally on horseback, and carries a
long stick, forms a sort of procession, preceded by wild
music, if such discordant sounds will bear the name.
Words can do no justice to the frightful scene which now
ensues. The naked savages&mdash;for on these occasions a
scanty piece of cotton is all their clothing&mdash;with their long
black hair, ordinarily worn in plaits, tossed about by the
rapid to-and-fro movements of the head, with faces and
hands reeking with blood, and uttering loud cries resembling
the bleating of goats, again enter the town. The place is
now at their mercy, and the people avoid them as much as
possible by shutting themselves up in their houses. A
Christian or a Jew would run great risk of losing his life if
either were found in the street. Goats are pushed out from
the doors, and these the fanatics tear immediately to pieces
with their hands, and then dispute over the morsels of
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
bleeding flesh, as though they were ravenous wolves
instead of men. Snakes also are thrown to them as tests
of their divine frenzy, and these share the fate of the goats.
Sometimes a luckless dog, straying as dogs will stray in
a tumult, is seized on. Then the laymen, should any
be at hand, will try to prevent the desecration of pious
mouths. But the fanatics sometimes prevail, and the
unclean animal, abhorred by the mussulman, is torn in
pieces and devoured, or pretended to be devoured, with
indiscriminating rage.</q><note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>
(London, 1876), pp. 267-269. Compare
Budgett Meakin, <hi rend='italic'>The Moors</hi>
(London, 1902), pp. 331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
same order of fanatics also exists
and holds similar orgies in Algeria,
especially at the town of Tlemcen.
See E. Doutté, <hi rend='italic'>Les Aïssâoua à Tlemcen</hi>
(Châlons-sur-Marne, 1900), p. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Later misinterpretations
of the
custom of
killing a
god in
animal
form.</note>
The custom of killing a god in animal form, which we
shall examine more in detail further on, belongs to a very
early stage of human culture, and is apt in later times to be
misunderstood. The advance of thought tends to strip the
old animal and plant gods of their bestial and vegetable
husk, and to leave their human attributes (which are always
the kernel of the conception) as the final and sole residuum.
In other words, animal and plant gods tend to become
purely anthropomorphic. When they have become wholly
or nearly so, the animals and plants which were at first the
deities themselves, still retain a vague and ill-understood
connexion with the anthropomorphic gods who have been
developed out of them. The origin of the relationship
between the deity and the animal or plant having been
forgotten, various stories are invented to explain it. These
explanations may follow one of two lines according as they
are based on the habitual or on the exceptional treatment
of the sacred animal or plant. The sacred animal was
habitually spared, and only exceptionally slain; and accordingly
the myth might be devised to explain either why it
was spared or why it was killed. Devised for the former
purpose, the myth would tell of some service rendered to the
deity by the animal; devised for the latter purpose, the
myth would tell of some injury inflicted by the animal on
the god. The reason given for sacrificing goats to Dionysus
exemplifies a myth of the latter sort. They were sacrificed
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
to him, it was said, because they injured the vine.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>Rerum rusticarum</hi>, i. 2. 19;
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> ii. 376-381, with the
comments of Servius on the passage
and on <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 118; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, i.
353 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Metamorph.</hi> xv. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
30.</note>
Now the goat, as we have seen, was originally an embodiment
of the god himself. But when the god had divested
himself of his animal character and had become essentially
anthropomorphic, the killing of the goat in his worship came
to be regarded no longer as a slaying of the deity himself,
but as a sacrifice offered to him; and since some reason had
to be assigned why the goat in particular should be sacrificed,
it was alleged that this was a punishment inflicted on the
goat for injuring the vine, the object of the god's especial
care. Thus we have the strange spectacle of a god sacrificed
to himself on the ground that he is his own enemy. And
as the deity is supposed to partake of the victim offered to
him, it follows that, when the victim is the god's old self, the
god eats of his own flesh. Hence the goat-god Dionysus is
represented as eating raw goat's blood;<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: ἀγρεύων
αἷμα τραγοκτόνον, ὠμοφάγον χάριν.</note> and the bull-god
Dionysus is called <q>eater of bulls.</q><note place='foot'>Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 357.</note> On the analogy of
these instances we may conjecture that wherever a deity is
described as the eater of a particular animal, the animal in
question was originally nothing but the deity himself.<note place='foot'>Hera αἰγοφάγος at Sparta, Pausanias,
iii. 15. 9; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
αἰγοφάγος (compare the representation
of Hera clad in a goat's skin, with the
animal's head and horns over her head,
Müller-Wieseler, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der alten
Kunst</hi>, i. No. 229 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; and the similar
representation of the Lanuvinian Juno,
W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon d. griech. u.
röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 605 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>); Zeus
αἰγοφάγος, <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
αἰγοφάγος, p. 27. 52 (compare Scholiast
on Oppianus, <hi rend='italic'>Halieut.</hi> iii. 10; L.
Stephani, in <hi rend='italic'>Compte-Rendu de la Commission
Impériale Archéologique pour
l'année 1869</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1870),
pp. 16-18); Apollo ὀψοφάγος at Elis,
Athenaeus, viii. 36, p. 346 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Artemis
καπροφάγος in Samos, Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
καπροφάγος; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> κριοφάγος.
Divine titles derived from killing
animals are probably to be similarly
explained, as Dionysus αἰγόβολος (Pausanias,
ix. 8. 2); Rhea or Hecate
κυνοσφαγής (J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Scholia on
Lycophron</hi>, 77); Apollo λυκοκτόνος
(Sophocles, <hi rend='italic'>Electra</hi>, 6); Apollo σαυροκτόνος
(Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxiv. 70).</note>
Later on we shall find that some savages propitiate dead bears
and whales by offering them portions of their own bodies.<note place='foot'>See below, vol. ii. pp. 184, 194,
196, 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 233.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
in the
worship of
Dionysus.</note>
All this, however, does not explain why a deity of
vegetation should appear in animal form. But the consideration
of that point had better be deferred till we have
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
discussed the character and attributes of Demeter. Meantime
it remains to mention that in some places, instead of
an animal, a human being was torn in pieces at the rites of
Dionysus. This was the practice in Chios and Tenedos;<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 55.</note>
and at Potniae in Boeotia the tradition ran that it had been
formerly the custom to sacrifice to the goat-smiting Dionysus
a child, for whom a goat was afterwards substituted.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ix. 8. 2.</note> At
Orchomenus, as we have seen, the human victim was taken
from the women of an old royal family.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As the slain bull
or goat represented the slain god, so, we may suppose, the
human victim also represented him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
legendary
deaths of
Pentheus
and
Lycurgus
may be
reminiscences
of a custom
of sacrificing
divine
kings in
the character
of
Dionysus.</note>
The legends of the deaths of Pentheus and Lycurgus,
two kings who are said to have been torn to pieces, the one
by Bacchanals, the other by horses, for their opposition to
the rites of Dionysus, may be, as I have already suggested,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 332 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
distorted reminiscences of a custom of sacrificing divine
kings in the character of Dionysus and of dispersing the
fragments of their broken bodies over the fields for the
purpose of fertilising them. In regard to Lycurgus, king of
the Thracian tribe of the Edonians, it is expressly said that
his subjects at the bidding of an oracle caused him to be
rent in pieces by horses for the purpose of restoring the
fertility of the ground after a period of barrenness and
dearth.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 5. 1.</note> There is no improbability in the tradition. We
have seen that in Africa and other parts of the world kings
or chiefs have often been put to death by their people for
similar reasons.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 344, 345, 346, 352, 354,
366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Further, it is significant that King Lycurgus
is said to have slain his own son Dryas with an axe in a fit
of madness, mistaking him for a vine-branch.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 5. 1.</note> Have we not
in this tradition a reminiscence of a custom of sacrificing the
king's son in place of the father? Similarly Athamas, a
King of Thessaly or Boeotia, is said to have been doomed
by an oracle to be sacrificed at the altar in order to remove
the curse of barrenness which afflicted his country; however,
he contrived to evade the sentence and in a fit of madness
killed his own son Learchus, mistaking him for a wild beast.
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
That this legend was not a mere myth is made probable by
a custom observed at Alus down to historical times: the
eldest male scion of the royal house was regularly sacrificed
in due form to Laphystian Zeus if he ever set foot within
the town-hall.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, vii. 197; Apollodorus,
<hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 9. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Scholiast on
Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Clouds</hi>, 257; J. Tzetzes,
<hi rend='italic'>Schol. on Lycophron</hi>, 21; Hyginus,
<hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>, 1-5. See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp.
161-163.</note> The close resemblance between the legends
of King Athamas and King Lycurgus furnishes a ground for
believing both legends to be based on a real custom of
sacrificing either the king himself or one of his sons for the
good of the country; and the story that the king's son
Dryas perished because his frenzied father mistook him for
a vine-branch fits in well with the theory that the victim in
these sacrifices represented the vine-god Dionysus. It is
probably no mere coincidence that Dionysus himself is said
to have been torn in pieces at Thebes,<note place='foot'>Clemens Romanus, <hi rend='italic'>Recognitiones</hi>,
x. 24 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Graeca</hi>, i.
col. 1434).</note> the very place where
according to legend the same fate befell king Pentheus at
the hands of the frenzied votaries of the vine-god.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 43 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 1043
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Theocritus, <hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> xxvi.; Pausanias,
ii. 2. 7. Strictly speaking, the murder
of Pentheus is said to have been perpetrated
not at Thebes, of which he
was king, but on Mount Cithaeron.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Survival of
Dionysiac
rites
among the
modern
Thracian
peasantry.</note>
The theory that in prehistoric times Greek and Thracian
kings or their sons may have been dismembered in the
character of the vine-god or the corn-god for the purpose of
fertilising the earth or quickening the vines has received of
late years some confirmation from the discovery that down to
the present time in Thrace, the original home of Dionysus,
a drama is still annually performed which reproduces with
remarkable fidelity some of the most striking traits in the
Dionysiac myth and ritual.<note place='foot'>See Mr. R. M. Dawkins, <q>The
Modern Carnival in Thrace and the
Cult of Dionysus,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, xxvi. (1906) pp. 191-206.
Mr. Dawkins describes the ceremonies
partly from his own observation, partly
from an account of them published by
Mr. G. M. Vizyenos in a Greek
periodical Θρακικὴ Ἐπετηρίς, of which
only one number was published at
Athens in 1897. From his personal
observations Mr. Dawkins was able to
confirm the accuracy of Mr. Vizyenos's
account.</note> In a former part of this work
I have already called attention to this interesting survival
of paganism among a Christian peasantry;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 333 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> but it seems
desirable and appropriate in this place to draw out somewhat
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
more fully the parallelism between the modern drama and
the ancient worship.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Drama
annually
performed
at the
Carnival
in the
villages
round
Viza,
an old
Thracian
capital.
The actors
in the
drama.</note>
The drama, which may reasonably be regarded as a direct
descendant of the Dionysiac rites, is annually performed at
the Carnival in all the Christian villages which cluster round
Viza, the ancient Bizya, a town of Thrace situated about
midway between Adrianople and Constantinople. In antiquity
the city was the capital of the Thracian tribe of the
Asti; the kings had their palace there,<note place='foot'>Strabo, vii. frag. 48; Stephanus Byzantius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Βιζύη.</note> probably in the
acropolis, of which some fine walls are still standing.
Inscriptions preserved in the modern town record the names
of some of these old kings.<note place='foot'>R. M. Dawkins, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 192.</note> The date of the celebration is
Cheese Monday, as it is locally called, which is the Monday
of the last week of Carnival. At Viza itself the mummery
has been shorn of some of its ancient features, but these
have been kept up at the villages and have been particularly
observed and recorded at the village of St. George (Haghios
Gheorgios). It is to the drama as acted at that village that
the following description specially applies. The principal
parts in the drama are taken by two men disguised in
goatskins. Each of them wears a headdress made of a
complete goatskin, which is stuffed so as to rise a foot or
more like a shako over his head, while the skin falls over the
face, forming a mask with holes cut for the eyes and mouth.
Their shoulders are thickly padded with hay to protect them
from the blows which used to be rained very liberally on
their backs. Fawnskins on their shoulders and goatskins on
their legs are or used to be part of their equipment, and
another indispensable part of it is a number of sheep-bells
tied round their waists. One of the two skin-clad actors
carries a bow and the other a wooden effigy of the male
organ of generation. Both these actors must be married
men. According to Mr. Vizyenos, they are chosen for periods
of four years. Two unmarried boys dressed as girls and
sometimes called brides also take part in the play; and a
man disguised as an old woman in rags carries a mock baby
in a basket; the brat is supposed to be a seven-months'
child born out of wedlock and begotten by an unknown
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
father. The basket in which the hopeful infant is paraded
bears the ancient name of the winnowing-fan (<foreign rend='italic'>likni</foreign>, contracted
from <foreign rend='italic'>liknon</foreign>) and the babe itself receives the very
title <q>He of the Winnowing-fan</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Liknites</foreign>) which in antiquity
was applied to Dionysus. Two other actors, clad in
rags with blackened faces and armed with stout saplings,
play the parts of a gypsy-man and his wife; others personate
policemen armed with swords and whips; and the
troupe is completed by a man who discourses music on a
bagpipe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ceremonies
include the
forging of
a ploughshare,
a
mock
marriage,
and a
pretence of
death and
resurrection.</note>
Such are the masqueraders. The morning of the day
on which they perform their little drama is spent by them
going from door to door collecting bread, eggs, or money.
At every door the two skin-clad maskers knock, the boys
disguised as girls dance, and the gypsy man and wife enact
an obscene pantomime on the straw-heap before the house.
When every house in the village has been thus visited, the
troop takes up position on the open space before the village
church, where the whole population has already mustered to
witness the performance. After a dance hand in hand, in
which all the actors take part, the two skin-clad maskers
withdraw and leave the field to the gypsies, who now pretend
to forge a ploughshare, the man making believe to hammer
the share and his wife to work the bellows. At this point
the old woman's baby is supposed to grow up at a great
pace, to develop a huge appetite for meat and drink,
and to clamour for a wife. One of the skin-clad men
now pursues one of the two pretended brides, and a
mock marriage is celebrated between the couple. After
these nuptials have been performed with a parody of a real
wedding, the mock bridegroom is shot by his comrade with
the bow and falls down on his face like dead. His slayer
thereupon feigns to skin him with a knife; but the dead
man's wife laments over her deceased husband with loud
cries, throwing herself across his prostrate body. In this
lamentation the slayer himself and all the other actors join
in: a Christian funeral service is burlesqued; and the pretended
corpse is lifted up as if to be carried to the grave.
At this point, however, the dead man disconcerts the
preparations for his burial by suddenly coming to life
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
again and getting up. So ends the drama of death and
resurrection.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ceremonies
also
include a
simulation
of ploughing
and
sowing by
skin-clad
men, accompanied
by prayers
for good
crops.</note>
The next act opens with a repetition of the pretence of
forging a ploughshare, but this time the gypsy man hammers
on a real share. When the implement is supposed to have
been fashioned, a real plough is brought forward, the
mockery appears to cease, the two boys dressed as girls are
yoked to the plough and drag it twice round the village
square contrary to the way of the sun. One of the two
skin-clad men walks at the tail of the plough, the other
guides it in front, and a third man follows in the rear
scattering seed from a basket. After the two rounds have
been completed, the gypsy and his wife are yoked to the
plough, and drag it a third time round the square, the two
skin-clad men still playing the part of ploughmen. At Viza
the plough is drawn by the skin-clad men themselves. While
the plough is going its rounds, followed by the sower sowing
the seed, the people pray aloud, saying, <q>May wheat be ten
piastres the bushel! Rye five piastres the bushel! Amen,
O God, that the poor may eat! Yea, O God, that poor folk
be filled!</q> This ends the performance. The evening is
spent in feasting on the proceeds of the house-to-house
visitation which took place in the morning.<note place='foot'>R. M. Dawkins, <q>The Modern
Carnival in Thrace and the Cult of
Dionysus,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic Studies</hi>,
xxvi. (1906) pp. 193-201.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Kindred
ceremony
performed
by a
masked
and skin-clad
man
who is
called a
king.</note>
A kindred festival is observed on the same day of the
Carnival at Kosti, a place in the extreme north of Thrace,
near the Black Sea. There a man dressed in sheepskins or
goatskins, with a mask on his face, bells round his neck, and
a broom in his hand, goes round the village collecting food
and presents. He is addressed as a king and escorted with
music. With him go boys dressed as girls, and another boy,
not so disguised, who carries wine in a wooden bottle and
gives of it to every householder to drink in a cup, receiving
a gift in return. The king then mounts a two-wheeled cart
and is drawn to the church. He carries seed in his hand,
and at the church two bands of men, one of married men
and the other of unmarried men, try each in turn to induce
the king to throw the seed on them. Finally he casts it on
the ground in front of the church. The ceremony ends with
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
stripping the king of his clothes and flinging him into the
river, after which he resumes his usual dress.<note place='foot'>R. M. Dawkins, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy
of these
modern
Thracian
ceremonies
to the
ancient
rites of
Dionysus.</note>
In these ceremonies, still annually held at and near an
old capital of Thracian kings, the points of similarity to the
ritual of the ancient Thracian deity Dionysus are sufficiently
obvious.<note place='foot'>They have been clearly indicated
by Mr. R. M. Dawkins, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
203 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare W. Ridgeway, <hi rend='italic'>The
Origin of Tragedy</hi> (Cambridge, 1910),
pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, who fully recognises the
connexion of the modern Thracian
ceremonies with the ancient rites of
Dionysus.</note> The goatskins in which the principal actors are
disguised remind us of the identification of Dionysus with a
goat: the infant, cradled in a winnowing-fan and taking
its name from the implement, answers exactly to the
traditions and the monuments which represent the infant
Dionysus as similarly cradled and similarly named: the
pretence that the baby is a seven-months' child born out
of wedlock and begotten by an unknown father tallies
precisely with the legend that Dionysus was born prematurely
in the seventh month as the offspring of an intrigue between
a mortal woman and a mysterious divine father:<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dialogi Deorum</hi>, ix. 2;
Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 4. 4.
According to the latter writer Dionysus
was born in the sixth month.</note> the same
coarse symbol of reproductive energy which characterised
the ancient ritual of Dionysus figures conspicuously in the
modern drama: the annual mock marriage of the goatskin-clad
mummer with the pretended bride may be compared
with the annual pretence of marrying Dionysus to the
Queen of Athens: and the simulated slaughter and resurrection
of the same goatskin-clad actor may be compared with
the traditional slaughter and resurrection of the god himself.
Further, the ceremony of ploughing, in which after his
resurrection the goatskin-clad mummer takes a prominent
part, fits in well not only with the legend that Dionysus was
the first to yoke oxen to the plough, but also with the
symbolism of the winnowing-fan in his worship; while the
prayers for plentiful crops which accompany the ploughing
accord with the omens of an abundant harvest which were
drawn of old from the mystic light seen to illumine by night
one of his ancient sanctuaries in Thrace. Lastly, in the
ceremony as observed at Kosti the giving of wine by the king's
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
attendant is an act worthy of the wine-god: the throwing
of seed by the king can only be interpreted, like the ploughing,
as a charm to promote the fertility of the ground; and
the royal title borne by the principal masker harmonises
well with the theory that the part of the god of the corn and
the wine was of old sustained by the Thracian kings who
reigned at Bisya.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
modern
Thracian
celebration
seems to
correspond
most
closely to
the ancient
Athenian
festival of
the Anthesteria.</note>
If we ask, To what ancient festival of Dionysus does the
modern celebration of the Carnival in Thrace most nearly
correspond? the answer can be hardly doubtful. The
Thracian drama of the mock marriage of the goatskin-clad
mummer, his mimic death and resurrection, and his subsequent
ploughing, corresponds both in date and in character
most nearly to the Athenian festival of the Anthesteria,
which was celebrated at Athens during three days in early
spring, towards the end of February or the beginning of
March. Thus the date of the Anthesteria could not fall
far from, and it might sometimes actually coincide with, the
last week of the Carnival, the date of the Thracian celebration.
While the details of the festival of the Anthesteria
are obscure, its general character is well known. It was
a festival both of wine-drinking and of the dead, whose
souls were supposed to revisit the city and to go about the
streets, just as in modern Europe and in many other parts
of the world the ghosts of the departed are still believed to
return to their old homes on one day of the year and to be
entertained by their relatives at a solemn Feast of All
Souls.<note place='foot'>As to such festivals of All Souls
see <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 301-318.</note> But the Dionysiac nature of the festival was
revealed not merely by the opening of the wine-vats and
the wassailing which went on throughout the city among
freemen and slaves alike; on the second day of the festival
the marriage of Dionysus with the Queen of Athens was
celebrated with great solemnity at the Bucolium or Ox-stall.<note place='foot'>The passages of ancient authors
which refer to the Anthesteria are
collected by Professor Martin P. Nilsson,
<hi rend='italic'>Studia de Dionysiis Atticis</hi> (Lund, 1900),
pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As to the festival, which has
been much discussed of late years, see
August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi> (Leipsic,
1864), pp. 345 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der
Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), pp. 384 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. F. Schoemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Alterthümer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Berlin, 1902),
ii. 516 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Rohde, <hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903), i. 236
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Martin P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
115 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P. Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Le Culte de
Dionysos en Attique</hi> (Paris, 1904), pp.
107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss J. E. Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena
to the Study of Greek Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Cambridge, 1908), pp. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek
States</hi>, v. (Oxford, 1909) pp. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
As to the marriage of Dionysus to the
Queen of Athens, see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
It has been suggested with much probability<note place='foot'>By Professor U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,
<hi rend='italic'>Aristoteles und Athen</hi>
(Berlin, 1893), ii. 42; and afterwards
by Miss J. E. Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena
to the Study of Greek Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 536.</note> that at
this sacred marriage in the Ox-stall the god was represented
wholly or partly in bovine shape, whether by an
image or by an actor dressed in the hide and wearing the
horns of a bull; for, as we have seen, Dionysus was often
supposed to assume the form of a bull and to present himself
in that guise to his worshippers. If this conjecture should
prove to be correct&mdash;though a demonstration of it can
hardly be expected&mdash;the sacred marriage of the Queen to
the Bull-god at Athens would be parallel to the sacred
marriage of the Queen to the Bull-god at Cnossus,
according to the interpretation which I have suggested
of the myth of Pasiphae and the Minotaur;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 71.</note> only
whereas the bull-god at Cnossus, if I am right, stood for the
Sun, the bull-god at Athens stood for the powers of vegetation,
especially the corn and the vines. It would not be
surprising that among a cattle-breeding people in early days
the bull, regarded as a type of strength and reproductive
energy, should be employed to symbolise and represent more
than one of the great powers of nature. If Dionysus did
indeed figure as a bull at his marriage, it is not improbable
that on that occasion his representative, whether a real bull
or a man dressed in a bull's hide, took part in a ceremony
of ploughing; for we have seen that the invention of yoking
oxen to the plough was ascribed to Dionysus, and we know
that the Athenians performed a sacred ceremony of ploughing,
which went by the name of the Ox-yoked Ploughing
and took place in a field or other open piece of
ground at the foot of the Acropolis.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Conjugalia Praecepta</hi>,
42.</note> It is a reasonable
conjecture that the field of the Ox-yoked Ploughing may
have adjoined the building called the Ox-stall in which the
marriage of Dionysus with the Queen was solemnised;<note place='foot'>Miss J. E. Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Mythology
and Monuments of Ancient Athens</hi>
(London, 1890), pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
that building is known to have been near the Prytaneum or
Town-Hall on the northern slope of the Acropolis.<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Constitution of Athens</hi>,
3. As to the situation of the Prytaneum
see my note on Pausanias, i. 18. 3 (vol.
ii. p. 172).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theory
that the
rites of the
Anthesteria
comprised
a drama
of the
violent
death and
resurrection
of
Dionysus.</note>
Thus on the whole the ancient festival of the Anthesteria,
so far as its features are preserved by tradition or can be
restored by the use of reasonable conjecture, presents several
important analogies to the modern Thracian Carnival in
respect of wine-drinking, a mock marriage of disguised actors,
and a ceremony of ploughing. The resemblance between
the ancient and the modern ritual would be still closer if
some eminent modern scholars, who wrote before the discovery
of the Thracian Carnival, and whose judgment was
therefore not biassed by its analogy to the Athenian festival,
are right in holding that another important feature of the
Anthesteria was the dramatic death and resurrection of
Dionysus.<note place='foot'>August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>,
pp. 371 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi>, pp. 398 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P.
Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Le Culte de Dionysos en
Attique</hi>, pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> They point out that at the marriage of Dionysus
fourteen Sacred Women officiated at fourteen altars;<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Neaer</hi>. 73,
pp. 1369 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Julius Pollux, viii. 108;
<hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>, p. 227, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
γεραῖραι; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> γεραραί.</note> that
the number of the Titans, who tore Dionysus in pieces, was
fourteen, namely seven male and seven female;<note place='foot'>Chr. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
p. 505.</note> and that
Osiris, a god who in some respects corresponded closely
to Dionysus, is said to have been rent by Typhon into
fourteen fragments.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18, 42.</note> Hence they conjecture that at Athens
the body of Dionysus was dramatically broken into fourteen
fragments, one for each of the fourteen altars, and that it
was afterwards dramatically pieced together and restored to
life by the fourteen Sacred Women, just as the broken body
of Osiris was pieced together by a company of gods and
goddesses and restored to life by his sister Isis.<note place='foot'>The resurrection of Osiris is not
described by Plutarch in his treatise
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, which is still our principal
source for the myth of the god; but
it is fortunately recorded in native
Egyptian writings. See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis,
Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, p. 274. P.
Foucart supposes that the resurrection
of Dionysus was enacted at the
Anthesteria; August Mommsen prefers
to suppose that it was enacted
in the following month at the Lesser
Mysteries.</note> The conjecture
is ingenious and plausible, but with our existing
sources of information it must remain a conjecture and
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
nothing more. Could it be established, it would forge
another strong link in the chain of evidence which binds
the modern Thracian Carnival to the ancient Athenian
Anthesteria; for in that case the drama of the divine death
and resurrection would have to be added to the other
features which these two festivals of spring possess in common,
and we should have to confess that Greece had what we
may call its Good Friday and its Easter Sunday long before
the events took place in Judaea which diffused these two
annual commemorations of the Dying and Reviving God
over a great part of the civilised world. From so simple a
beginning may flow consequences so far-reaching and impressive;
for in the light of the rude Thracian ceremony
we may surmise that the high tragedy of the death and
resurrection of Dionysus originated in a rustic mummers'
play acted by ploughmen for the purpose of fertilising the
brown earth which they turned up with the gleaming share
in sunshiny days of spring, as they followed the slow-paced
oxen down the long furrows in the fallow field. Later on
we shall see that a play of the same sort is still acted, or
was acted down to recent years, by English yokels on
Plough Monday.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Legends of
human
sacrifice in
the worship
of
Dionysus
may be
mere misinterpretations
of
ritual.</note>
But before we pass from the tragic myth and ritual of
Dionysus to the sweeter story and milder worship of Demeter
and Persephone, the true Greek deities of the corn, it is fair
to admit that the legends of human sacrifice, which have
left so dark a stain on the memory of the old Thracian god,
may have been nothing more than mere misinterpretations
of a sacrificial ritual in which an animal victim was treated
as a human being. For example, at Tenedos the new-born
calf sacrificed to Dionysus was shod in buskins, and the
mother cow was tended like a woman in child-bed.<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>De Natura Animalium</hi>,
xii. 34. Compare W. Robertson Smith,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1894), pp. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At
Rome a she-goat was sacrificed to Vedijovis as if it were a
human victim.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, v. 12. 12.</note> Yet on the other hand it is equally possible,
and perhaps more probable, that these curious rites were
themselves mitigations of an older and ruder custom of
sacrificing human beings, and that the later pretence of
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
treating the sacrificial victims as if they were human beings
was merely part of a pious and merciful fraud, which
palmed off on the deity less precious victims than living
men and women. This interpretation is supported by the
undoubted cases in which animals have been substituted
for human victims.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 166 note 1, and below, p. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</note> On the whole we may conclude that
neither the polished manners of a later age, nor the glamour
which Greek poetry and art threw over the figure of
Dionysus, sufficed to conceal or erase the deep lines of
savagery and cruelty imprinted on the features of this
barbarous deity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Demeter And Persephone.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demeter
and Persephone
as Greek
personifications
of
the decay
and revival
of vegetation.</note>
Dionysus was not the only Greek deity whose tragic story
and ritual appear to reflect the decay and revival of vegetation.
In another form and with a different application the
old tale reappears in the myth of Demeter and Persephone.
Substantially their myth is identical with the Syrian one of
Aphrodite (Astarte) and Adonis, the Phrygian one of Cybele
and Attis, and the Egyptian one of Isis and Osiris. In the
Greek fable, as in its Asiatic and Egyptian counterparts, a
goddess mourns the loss of a loved one, who personifies the
vegetation, more especially the corn, which dies in winter to
revive in spring; only whereas the Oriental imagination
figured the loved and lost one as a dead lover or a dead
husband lamented by his leman or his wife, Greek fancy
embodied the same idea in the tenderer and purer form of a
dead daughter bewailed by her sorrowing mother.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Homeric
<hi rend='italic'>Hymn to
Demeter</hi>. The rape
of Persephone.
The
wrath of
Demeter. The return
of Persephone.</note>
The oldest literary document which narrates the myth
of Demeter and Persephone is the beautiful Homeric <hi rend='italic'>Hymn
to Demeter</hi>, which critics assign to the seventh century before
our era.<note place='foot'>R. Foerster, <hi rend='italic'>Der Raub und die
Rückkehr der Persephone</hi> (Stuttgart,
1874), pp. 37-39; <hi rend='italic'>The Homeric
Hymns</hi>, edited by T. W. Allen and
E. E. Sikes (London, 1904), pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
A later date&mdash;the age of the Pisistratids&mdash;is
assigned to the hymn by A.
Baumeister (<hi rend='italic'>Hymni Homerici</hi>, Leipsic,
1860, p. 280).</note> The object of the poem is to explain the origin of
the Eleusinian mysteries, and the complete silence of the
poet as to Athens and the Athenians, who in after ages
took a conspicuous part in the festival, renders it probable
that the hymn was composed in the far off time when
Eleusis was still a petty independent state, and before the
stately procession of the Mysteries had begun to defile, in
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
bright September days, over the low chain of barren rocky
hills which divides the flat Eleusinian cornland from the
more spacious olive-clad expanse of the Athenian plain. Be
that as it may, the hymn reveals to us the conception which
the writer entertained of the character and functions of the
two goddesses: their natural shapes stand out sharply enough
under the thin veil of poetical imagery. The youthful
Persephone, so runs the tale, was gathering roses and lilies,
crocuses and violets, hyacinths and narcissuses in a lush
meadow, when the earth gaped and Pluto, lord of the Dead,
issuing from the abyss carried her off on his golden car to
be his bride and queen in the gloomy subterranean world.
Her sorrowing mother Demeter, with her yellow tresses
veiled in a dark mourning mantle, sought her over land and
sea, and learning from the Sun her daughter's fate she
withdrew in high dudgeon from the gods and took up her
abode at Eleusis, where she presented herself to the king's
daughters in the guise of an old woman, sitting sadly under
the shadow of an olive tree beside the Maiden's Well, to
which the damsels had come to draw water in bronze pitchers
for their father's house. In her wrath at her bereavement
the goddess suffered not the seed to grow in the earth but kept
it hidden under ground, and she vowed that never would she
set foot on Olympus and never would she let the corn sprout
till her lost daughter should be restored to her. Vainly the
oxen dragged the ploughs to and fro in the fields; vainly
the sower dropped the barley seed in the brown furrows;
nothing came up from the parched and crumbling soil.
Even the Rarian plain near Eleusis, which was wont to
wave with yellow harvests, lay bare and fallow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 302 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 330 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 349 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 414 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 450 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Mankind
would have perished of hunger and the gods would have
been robbed of the sacrifices which were their due, if Zeus
in alarm had not commanded Pluto to disgorge his prey, to
restore his bride Persephone to her mother Demeter. The
grim lord of the Dead smiled and obeyed, but before he
sent back his queen to the upper air on a golden car, he
gave her the seed of a pomegranate to eat, which ensured
that she would return to him. But Zeus stipulated that
henceforth Persephone should spend two thirds of every
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
year with her mother and the gods in the upper world and
one third of the year with her husband in the nether world,
from which she was to return year by year when the earth
was gay with spring flowers. Gladly the daughter then
returned to the sunshine, gladly her mother received her and
fell upon her neck; and in her joy at recovering the lost
one Demeter made the corn to sprout from the clods of the
ploughed fields and all the broad earth to be heavy with
leaves and blossoms. And straightway she went and
shewed this happy sight to the princes of Eleusis, to
Triptolemus, Eumolpus, Diocles, and to the king Celeus
himself, and moreover she revealed to them her sacred rites
and mysteries. Blessed, says the poet, is the mortal man
who has seen these things, but he who has had no share of
them in life will never be happy in death when he has
descended into the darkness of the grave. So the two
goddesses departed to dwell in bliss with the gods on
Olympus; and the bard ends the hymn with a pious prayer
to Demeter and Persephone that they would be pleased to
grant him a livelihood in return for his song.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 310 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> With
the myth as set forth in the Homeric
hymn may be compared the accounts
of Apollodorus (<hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 5) and
Ovid (<hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 425-618; <hi rend='italic'>Metamorphoses</hi>,
v. 385 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The aim
of the
Homeric
<hi rend='italic'>Hymn to
Demeter</hi>
is to explain
the
traditional
foundation
of the
Eleusinian
mysteries
by
Demeter.</note>
It has been generally recognised, and indeed it seems
scarcely open to doubt, that the main theme which the poet
set before himself in composing this hymn was to describe
the traditional foundation of the Eleusinian mysteries by the
goddess Demeter. The whole poem leads up to the transformation
scene in which the bare leafless expanse of the
Eleusinian plain is suddenly turned, at the will of the
goddess, into a vast sheet of ruddy corn; the beneficent
deity takes the princes of Eleusis, shews them what she has
done, teaches them her mystic rites, and vanishes with her
daughter to heaven. The revelation of the mysteries is the
triumphal close of the piece. This conclusion is confirmed
by a more minute examination of the poem, which proves
that the poet has given, not merely a general account of the
foundation of the mysteries, but also in more or less veiled
language mythical explanations of the origin of particular
rites which we have good reason to believe formed essential
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
features of the festival. Amongst the rites as to which the
poet thus drops significant hints are the preliminary fast of
the candidates for initiation, the torchlight procession, the
all-night vigil, the sitting of the candidates, veiled and in
silence, on stools covered with sheepskins, the use of scurrilous
language, the breaking of ribald jests, and the solemn communion
with the divinity by participation in a draught of
barley-water from a holy chalice.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 47-50, 191-211,
292-295, with the notes of
Messrs. Allen and Sikes in their edition
of the Homeric Hymns (London,
1904). As to representations of the
candidates for initiation seated on stools
draped with sheepskins, see L. R.
Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>,
iii. (Oxford, 1907) pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, with
plate xv <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>. On a well-known marble
vase there figured the stool is covered
with a lion's skin and one of the candidate's
feet rests on a ram's skull or horns;
but in two other examples of the same
scene the ram's fleece is placed on the
seat (Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 240 note a),
just as it is said to have been placed
on Demeter's stool in the Homeric
hymn. As to the form of communion
in the Eleusinian mysteries, see
Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> 21,
p. 18 ed. Potter; Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus
nationes</hi>, v. 26; L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
iii. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For discussions
of the ancient evidence bearing on the
Eleusinian mysteries it may suffice to
refer to Chr. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>
(Königsberg, 1829), pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. F.
Schoemann, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Alterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>
ii. 387 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Aug. Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>
(Leipsic, 1864), pp. 222 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi>
(Leipsic, 1898), pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; P.
Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur l'Origine et
la Nature des Mystères d'Eleusis</hi>
(Paris, 1895) (<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de l'Académie
des Inscriptions</hi>, xxxv.); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Les
grands Mystères d'Eleusis</hi> (Paris,
1900) (<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de l'Académie des
Inscriptions</hi>, xxxvii.); F. Lenormant
and E. Pottier, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Eleusinia,</q> in
Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
des Antiquités Grecques et Romaines</hi>,
ii. 544 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults
of the Greek States</hi>, iii. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Revelation
of a reaped
ear of corn
the crowning
act
of the
mysteries.</note>
But there is yet another and a deeper secret of the
mysteries which the author of the poem appears to have
divulged under cover of his narrative. He tells us how, as
soon as she had transformed the barren brown expanse of the
Eleusinian plain into a field of golden grain, she gladdened
the eyes of Triptolemus and the other Eleusinian princes by
shewing them the growing or standing corn. When we
compare this part of the story with the statement of a
Christian writer of the second century, Hippolytus, that the
very heart of the mysteries consisted in shewing to the
initiated a reaped ear of corn,<note place='foot'>Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refutatio Omnium
Haeresium</hi>, v. 8, p. 162, ed. L.
Duncker et F. G. Schneidewin (Göttingen,
1859). The word which the
poet uses to express the revelation
(δεῖξε, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, verse 474) is
a technical one in the mysteries; the
full phrase was δεικνύναι τὰ ἱερά. See
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi>, 22; Xenophon,
<hi rend='italic'>Hellenica</hi>, vi. 3. 6; Isocrates, <hi rend='italic'>Panegyricus</hi>,
6; Lysias, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Andocidem</hi>,
51; Chr. A. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
p. 51.</note> we can hardly doubt that
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
the poet of the hymn was well acquainted with this solemn
rite, and that he deliberately intended to explain its origin
in precisely the same way as he explained other rites of the
mysteries, namely by representing Demeter as having set
the example of performing the ceremony in her own person.
Thus myth and ritual mutually explain and confirm each
other. The poet of the seventh century before our era
gives us the myth&mdash;he could not without sacrilege have
revealed the ritual: the Christian father reveals the ritual,
and his revelation accords perfectly with the veiled hint of
the old poet. On the whole, then, we may, with many
modern scholars, confidently accept the statement of the
learned Christian father Clement of Alexandria, that the
myth of Demeter and Persephone was acted as a sacred
drama in the mysteries of Eleusis.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 12, p. 12 ed. Potter: Δηὼ δὲ καὶ
Κόρη δρᾶμα ἤδη ἐγενέσθην μυστικόν; καὶ
τὴν πλάνην καὶ τὴν ἀρπαγὴν καὶ τὸ πένθος
αὐταῖν Ἐλευσὶς δᾳδουχεῖ. Compare
F. Lenormant, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Eleusinia,</q> in
Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
des Antiquités Grecques et Romaines</hi>
iii. 578: <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Que le drame mystique des
aventures de Déméter et de Coré constituât
le spectacle essentiel de l'initiation,
c'est ce dont il nous semble impossible
de douter</foreign>.</q> A similar view
is expressed by G. F. Schoemann
(<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Alterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 402);
Preller-Robert (<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,
i. 793); P. Foucart (<hi rend='italic'>Recherches
sur l'Origine et la Nature des Mystères
d'Eleusis</hi>, Paris, 1895, pp. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Les Grands Mystères d'Eleusis</hi>,
Paris, 1900, p. 137); E. Rohde
(<hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 289); and L. R. Farnell
(<hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>, iii. 134,
173 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demeter
and Persephone
personifications
of
the corn. Persephone
the seed
sown in
autumn
and
sprouting
in spring.
Demeter
the old
corn of
last year.
The view
that
Demeter
was the
Earth
goddess is
implicitly
rejected by
the author
of the
Homeric
<hi rend='italic'>Hymn to
Demeter</hi>.</note>
But if the myth was acted as a part, perhaps as
the principal part, of the most famous and solemn religious
rites of ancient Greece, we have still to enquire, What
was, after all, stripped of later accretions, the original
kernel of the myth which appears to later ages surrounded
and transfigured by an aureole of awe and mystery, lit up
by some of the most brilliant rays of Grecian literature and
art? If we follow the indications given by our oldest
literary authority on the subject, the author of the Homeric
hymn to Demeter, the riddle is not hard to read; the figures
of the two goddesses, the mother and the daughter, resolve
themselves into personifications of the corn.<note place='foot'>On Demeter and Proserpine as
goddesses of the corn, see L. Preller,
<hi rend='italic'>Demeter und Persephone</hi> (Hamburg,
1837), pp. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and especially
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1884), pp. 202
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At least this
appears to be fairly certain for the daughter Persephone.
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
The goddess who spends three or, according to another
version of the myth, six months of every year with the
dead under ground and the remainder of the year with the
living above ground;<note place='foot'>According to the author of the
Homeric Hymn to Demeter (verses
398 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 445 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) and Apollodorus
(<hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 5. 3) the time which
Persephone had to spend under ground
was one third of the year; according
to Ovid (<hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 613 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Metamorphoses</hi>,
v. 564 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) and Hyginus
(<hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>, 146) it was one half.</note> in whose absence the barley seed is
hidden in the earth and the fields lie bare and fallow; on
whose return in spring to the upper world the corn shoots
up from the clods and the earth is heavy with leaves and
blossoms&mdash;this goddess can surely be nothing else than a
mythical embodiment of the vegetation, and particularly of
the corn, which is buried under the soil for some months of
every winter and comes to life again, as from the grave, in
the sprouting cornstalks and the opening flowers and foliage
of every spring. No other reasonable and probable explanation
of Persephone seems possible.<note place='foot'>This view of the myth of Persephone
is, for example, accepted and
clearly stated by L. Preller (<hi rend='italic'>Demeter
und Persephone</hi>, pp. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> And if the
daughter goddess was a personification of the young corn
of the present year, may not the mother goddess be a
personification of the old corn of last year, which has given
birth to the new crops? The only alternative to this view
of Demeter would seem to be to suppose that she is a
personification of the earth, from whose broad bosom the
corn and all other plants spring up, and of which accordingly
they may appropriately enough be regarded as the daughters.
This view of the original nature of Demeter has indeed been
taken by some writers, both ancient and modern,<note place='foot'>See, for example, Firmicus Maternus,
<hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum religionum</hi>,
17. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Frugum substantiam volunt
Proserpinam dicere, quia fruges
hominibus cum seri coeperint prosunt.
Terram ipsam Cererem nominant,
nomen hoc a gerendis fructibus mutuati</foreign></q>;
L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Demeter und Persephone</hi>,
p. 128, <q><hi rend='italic'>Der Erdboden wird Demeter,
die Vegetation Persephone</hi>.</q> François
Lenormant, again, held that Demeter
was originally a personification of the
earth regarded as divine, but he
admitted that from the time of the
Homeric poems downwards she was
sharply distinguished from Ge, the
earth-goddess proper. See Daremberg
et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités
Grecques et Romaines</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Ceres,</q>
ii. 1022 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Some light might be
thrown on the question whether
Demeter was an Earth Goddess or a
Corn Goddess, if we could be sure of
the etymology of her name, which has
been variously explained as <q>Earth
Mother</q> (Δῆ μήτηρ equivalent to Γῆ
μήτηρ) and as <q>Barley Mother</q> (from
an alleged Cretan word δηαί <q>barley</q>:
see <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Δηώ,
pp. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). The former etymology
has been the most popular; the latter
is maintained by W. Mannhardt. See
L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Demeter und Persephone</hi>,
pp. 317, 366 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. G. Welcker,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Götterlehre</hi>, i. 385 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Preller-Robert, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,
i. 747 note 6; Kern, in Pauly-Wissowa's
<hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
iv. 2713; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, pp.
281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> But my learned friend the
Rev. Professor J. H. Moulton informs
me that both etymologies are open to
serious philological objections, and that
no satisfactory derivation of the first
syllable of Demeter's name has yet
been proposed. Accordingly I prefer
to base no argument on an analysis of
the name, and to rest my interpretation
of the goddess entirely on her myth,
ritual, and representations in art.
Etymology is at the best a very slippery
ground on which to rear mythological
theories.</note> and it is
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
one which can be reasonably maintained. But it appears
to have been rejected by the author of the Homeric hymn
to Demeter, for he not only distinguishes Demeter from the
personified Earth but places the two in the sharpest opposition
to each other. He tells us that it was Earth who, in
accordance with the will of Zeus and to please Pluto, lured
Persephone to her doom by causing the narcissuses to grow
which tempted the young goddess to stray far beyond the
reach of help in the lush meadow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus Demeter of the
hymn, far from being identical with the Earth-goddess, must
have regarded that divinity as her worst enemy, since it
was to her insidious wiles that she owed the loss of her
daughter. But if the Demeter of the hymn cannot have
been a personification of the earth, the only alternative
apparently is to conclude that she was a personification of
the corn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Yellow
Demeter,
the goddess
who
sifts
the ripe
grain from
the chaff
at the
threshing-floor. The Green
Demeter
the goddess
of the
green corn.</note>
With this conclusion all the indications of the hymn-writer
seem to harmonise. He certainly represents Demeter
as the goddess by whose power and at whose pleasure
the corn either grows or remains hidden in the ground;
and to what deity can such powers be so fittingly ascribed
as to the goddess of the corn? He calls Demeter yellow
and tells how her yellow tresses flowed down on her
shoulders;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 279, 302.</note> could any colour be more appropriate with
which to paint the divinity of the yellow grain? The same
identification of Demeter with the ripe, the yellow corn is
made even more clearly by a still older poet, Homer
himself, or at all events the author of the fifth book of the
<hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>. There we read: <q>And even as the wind carries the
chaff about the sacred threshing-floors, when men are
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
winnowing, what time yellow Demeter sifts the corn from
the chaff on the hurrying blast, so that the heaps of chaff
grow white below, so were the Achaeans whitened above by
the cloud of dust which the hoofs of the horses spurned to
the brazen heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, v. 499-504.</note> Here the yellow Demeter who sifts
the grain from the chaff at the threshing-floor can hardly be
any other than the goddess of the yellow corn; she cannot
be the Earth-goddess, for what has the Earth-goddess to do
with the grain and the chaff blown about a threshing-floor?
With this interpretation it agrees that elsewhere Homer
speaks of men eating <q>Demeter's corn</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xiii. 322, xxi. 76.</note> and still more
definitely Hesiod speaks of <q>the annual store of food, which
the earth bears, Demeter's corn,</q><note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> thus distinguishing the
goddess of the corn from the earth which bears it. Still
more clearly does a later Greek poet personify the corn as
Demeter when, in allusion to the time of the corn-reaping,
he says that then <q>the sturdy swains cleave Demeter limb
from limb.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
66.</note> And just as the ripe or yellow corn was
personified as the Yellow Demeter, so the unripe or green
corn was personified as the Green Demeter. In that
character the goddess had sanctuaries at Athens and other
places; sacrifices were appropriately offered to Green
Demeter in spring when the earth was growing green with
the fresh vegetation, and the victims included sows big
with young,<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 22. 3 with my note;
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 615; J. de Prott et
L. Ziehen, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Graecorum Sacrae</hi>,
Fasciculus I. (Leipsic, 1896) p. 49;
Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
28; Scholiast on Sophocles,
<hi rend='italic'>Oedipus Colon.</hi> 1600; L. R. Farnell,
<hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>, iii.
312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> which no doubt were intended not merely to
symbolise but magically to promote the abundance of the
crops.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The cereals
called
<q>Demeter's
fruits.</q></note>
In Greek the various kinds of corn were called by the
general name of <q>Demeter's fruits,</q><note place='foot'>Herodotus, i. 193, iv. 198;
Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Hellenica</hi>, vi. 3. 6; Aelian,
<hi rend='italic'>Historia Animalium</hi>, xvii. 16; Cornutus,
<hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
28; <hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, i. 12. 36; <hi rend='italic'>Paroemiographi
Graeci</hi>, ed. Leutsch et Schneidewin,
Appendix iv. 20 (vol. i. p. 439).</note> just as in Latin they
were called the <q>fruits or gifts of Ceres,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cerealia</hi> in Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xxiii. 1; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cerealia munera</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cerealia
dona</foreign> in Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metamorphoses</hi>, xi.
121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> an expression
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
which survives in the English word cereals. Tradition ran
that before Demeter's time men neither cultivated corn nor
tilled the ground, but roamed the mountains and woods in
search of the wild fruits which the earth produced spontaneously
from her womb for their subsistence. The
tradition clearly implies not only that Demeter was the
goddess of the corn, but that she was different from and
younger than the goddess of the Earth, since it is expressly
affirmed that before Demeter's time the earth existed and
supplied mankind with nourishment in the shape of wild
herbs, grasses, flowers and fruits.<note place='foot'>Libanius, ed. J. J. Reiske, vol. iv.
p. 367, <hi rend='italic'>Corinth. Oratio</hi>: Οὐκ αὖθις
ἡμῶν ακαρποσ ἡ γῆ δοκεῖ γεγονέναι?
οὐ πάλιν ὁ πρὸ Δήμητρος εἶναι βίος?
καί τοι καὶ πρὸ Δήμητρος αἱ γεωργίαι
μὲν οὐκ ἦσαν; οὐδὲ ἄροτοι, αὐτόφυτοι
δὲ βοτάναι καὶ πόαι; καὶ πολλὰ εἶχεν
εἰς σωτηρίαν ἀνθρώπων αὐτοσχέδια ἄνθη
ἡ γῆ ὠδίνουσα καὶ κύουσα πρὸ τῶν
ἡμέρων τὰ ἄγρια. Ἐπλανῶντο μὲν,
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλους; ἄλση καὶ ὄρη
περιῄσαν, ζητοῦντες αὐτόματον τροφήν.
In this passage, which no doubt represents
the common Greek view on the
subject, the earth is plainly personified
(ὠδίνουσα καὶ κύουσα), which points the
antithesis between her and the goddess
of the corn. Diodorus Siculus also
says (v. 68) that corn grew wild with
the other plants before Demeter taught
men to cultivate it and to sow the
seed.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Corn and
poppies as
symbols of
Demeter.</note>
In ancient art Demeter and Persephone are characterised
as goddesses of the corn by the crowns of corn which they
wear on their heads and by the stalks of corn which they
hold in their hands.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 616; Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio Evangelii</hi>, iii. 11. 5;
Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
28; <hi rend='italic'>Anthologia Palatina</hi>,
vi. 104. 8; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 235; J. Overbeck,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Kunstmythologie</hi>,
iii. (Leipsic, 1873-1878) pp. 420,
421, 453, 479, 480, 502, 505, 507,
514, 522, 523, 524, 525 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. R.
Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>,
iii. 217 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 222, 226, 232,
233, 237, 260, 265, 268, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
271.</note> Theocritus describes a smiling image
of Demeter standing by a heap of yellow grain on a
threshing-floor and grasping sheaves of barley and poppies in
both her hands.<note place='foot'>Theocritus, <hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> vii. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
That the sheaves which the goddess
grasped were of barley is proved by
verses 31-34 of the poem.</note> Indeed corn and poppies singly or together
were a frequent symbol of the goddess, as we learn not only
from the testimony of ancient writers<note place='foot'>Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio Evangelii</hi>,
iii. 11. 5; Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae
Compendium</hi>, 28, p. 56, ed. C. Lang;
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 212, with the comment
of Servius.</note> but from many existing
monuments of classical art.<note place='foot'>See the references to the works of
Overbeck and Farnell above. For example,
a fine statue at Copenhagen, in
the style of the age of Phidias, represents
Demeter holding poppies and ears
of corn in her left hand. See Farnell,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 268, with plate xxviii.</note> The naturalness of the symbol
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
can be doubted by no one who has seen&mdash;and who has not
seen?&mdash;a field of yellow corn bespangled thick with scarlet
poppies; and we need not resort to the shifts of an ancient
mythologist, who explained the symbolism of the poppy in
Demeter's hand by comparing the globular shape of the
poppy to the roundness of our globe, the unevenness of its
edges to hills and valleys, and the hollow interior of the
scarlet flower to the caves and dens of the earth.<note place='foot'>Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
28, p. 56 ed. C. Lang.</note> If only
students would study the little black and white books of
men less and the great rainbow-tinted book of nature more;
if they would more frequently exchange the heavy air and
the dim light of libraries for the freshness and the sunshine
of the open sky; if they would oftener unbend their minds
by rural walks between fields of waving corn, beside rivers
rippling by under grey willows, or down green lanes, where
the hedges are white with the hawthorn bloom or red with
wild roses, they might sometimes learn more about primitive
religion than can be gathered from many dusty volumes, in
which wire-drawn theories are set forth with all the tedious
parade of learning.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Persephone
portrayed
as the
young corn
sprouting
from the
ground.</note>
Nowhere, perhaps, in the monuments of Greek art is the
character of Persephone as a personification of the young
corn sprouting in spring portrayed more gracefully and more
truly than on a coin of Lampsacus of the fourth century
before our era. On it we see the goddess in the very act
of rising from the earth. <q>Her face is upraised; in her
hand are three ears of corn, and others together with grapes
are springing behind her shoulder. Complete is here the
identification of the goddess and her attribute: she is
embowered amid the ears of growing corn, and like it half
buried in the ground. She does not make the corn and
vine grow, but she <emph>is</emph> the corn and vine growing, and
returning again to the face of the earth after lying hidden in
its depths. Certainly the artist who designed this beautiful
figure thoroughly understood Hellenic religion.</q><note place='foot'>Percy Gardner, <hi rend='italic'>Types of Greek
Coins</hi> (Cambridge, 1883), p. 174, with
plate x. No. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demeter
invoked
and propitiated
by
Greek
farmers
before the
autumnal
sowing. Boeotian
festival of
mourning
for the
descent
of Persephone
at the
autumnal
sowing.</note>
As the goddess who first bestowed corn on mankind
and taught them to sow and cultivate it,<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, v. 68. 1.</note> Demeter was
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
naturally invoked and propitiated by farmers before they
undertook the various operations of the agricultural year.
In autumn, when he heard the sonorous trumpeting of the
cranes, as they winged their way southward in vast flocks
high overhead, the Greek husbandman knew that the rains
were near and that the time of ploughing was at hand; but
before he put his hand to the plough he prayed to Underground
Zeus and to Holy Demeter for a heavy crop of
Demeter's sacred corn. Then he guided the ox-drawn
plough down the field, turning up the brown earth with the
share, while a swain followed close behind with a hoe, who
covered up the seed as fast as it fell to protect it from the
voracious birds that fluttered and twittered at the plough-tail.<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 448-474;
Epictetus, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertationes</hi>, iii.
21. 12. For the autumnal migration
and clangour of the cranes as the
signal for sowing, see Aristophanes,
<hi rend='italic'>Birds</hi>, 711; compare Theognis, 1197
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> But the Greeks also ploughed in
spring (Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 462; Xenophon,
<hi rend='italic'>Oeconom.</hi> 16); indeed they ploughed
thrice in the year (Theophrastus,
<hi rend='italic'>Historia Plantarum</hi>, vii. 13. 6). At
the approach of autumn the cranes of
northern Europe collect about rivers
and lakes, and after much trumpeting
set out in enormous bands on their
southward journey to the tropical
regions of Africa and India. In early
spring they return northward, and
their flocks may be descried passing at
a marvellous height overhead or halting
to rest in the meadows beside some
broad river. The bird emits its
trumpet-like note both on the ground
and on the wing. See Alfred Newton,
<hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Birds</hi> (London, 1893-1896),
pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
But while the ordinary Greek farmer took the signal
for ploughing from the clangour of the cranes, Hesiod and
other writers who aimed at greater exactness laid it down
as a rule that the ploughing should begin with the autumnal
setting of the Pleiades in the morning, which in Hesiod's
time fell on the twenty-sixth of October.<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 383 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
615-617; Aratus, <hi rend='italic'>Phaenomena</hi>, 254-267;
L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>
(Berlin, 1825-1826), i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According
to Pliny (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. 49)
wheat, barley, and all other cereals
were sown in Greece and Asia from
the time of the autumn setting of the
Pleiades. This date for ploughing
and sowing is confirmed by Hippocrates
and other medical writers. See
W. Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Greek and
Roman Antiquities</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 234. Latin
writers prescribe the same date for the
sowing of wheat. See Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi>
i. 219-226; Columella, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>,
ii. 8; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. 223-226.
In Columella's time the Pleiades, he
tells us (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>), set in the morning of
October 24th of the Julian calendar,
which would correspond to the October
16th of our reckoning.</note> The month
in which the Pleiades set in the morning was generally
recognised by the Greeks as the month of sowing; it
corresponded apparently in part to our October, in part to
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
our November. The Athenians called it Pyanepsion; the
Boeotians named it significantly Damatrius, that is,
Demeter's month, and they celebrated a feast of mourning
because, says Plutarch, who as a Boeotian speaks with
authority on such a matter, Demeter was then in mourning
for the descent of Persephone.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 69.</note> Is it possible to express
more clearly the true original nature of Persephone as the
corn-seed which has just been buried in the earth? The
obvious, the almost inevitable conclusion did not escape
Plutarch. He tells us that the mournful rites which were
held at the time of the autumn sowing nominally commemorated
the actions of deities, but that the real sadness
was for the fruits of the earth, some of which at that season
dropped of themselves and vanished from the trees, while
others in the shape of seed were committed with anxious
thoughts to the ground by men, who scraped the earth
and then huddled it up over the seed, just as if they were
burying and mourning for the dead.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 70.
Similarly Cornutus says that <q>Hades
is fabled to have carried off Demeter's
daughter because the seed vanishes
for a time under the earth,</q> and he
mentions that a festival of Demeter
was celebrated at the time of sowing
(<hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>, 28,
pp. 54, 55 ed. C. Lang). In a fragment
of a Greek calendar which is preserved
in the Louvre <q>the ascent (ἀναβάσις) of
the goddess</q> is dated the seventh day
of the month Dius, and <q>the descent or
setting (δύσις) of the goddess</q> is dated
the fourth day of the month Hephaestius,
a month which seems to be otherwise
unknown. See W. Froehner,
<hi rend='italic'>Musée Nationale du Louvre, Les Inscriptions
Grecques</hi> (Paris, 1880), pp.
50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Greek inscriptions found
at Mantinea refer to a worship of
Demeter and Persephone, who are
known to have had a sanctuary there
(Pausanias, viii. 9. 2). The people of
Mantinea celebrated <q>mysteries of the
goddess</q> and a festival called the
<foreign rend='italic'>koragia</foreign>, which seems to have represented
the return of Persephone from
the lower world. See W. Immerwahr,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Kulte und Mythen Arkadiens</hi>
(Leipsic, 1891), pp. 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; S.
Reinach, <hi rend='italic'>Traité d'Epigraphie Grecque</hi>
(Paris, 1885), pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Hesychius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> κοράγειν.</note> Surely this interpretation
of the custom and of the myth of Persephone is
not only beautiful but true.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thank-offerings
of
ripe grain
presented
by Greek
farmers to
Demeter
after the
harvest.
Theocritus's
description
of
a harvest-home
in
Cos.</note>
And just as the Greek husbandman prayed to the Corn
Goddess when he committed the seed, with anxious forebodings,
to the furrows, so after he had reaped the harvest
and brought back the yellow sheaves with rejoicing to the
threshing-floor, he paid the bountiful goddess her dues in
the form of a thank-offering of golden grain. Theocritus
has painted for us in glowing colours a picture of a
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
rustic harvest-home, as it fell on a bright autumn day
some two thousand years ago in the little Greek island of
Cos.<note place='foot'>Theocritus, <hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> vii.</note> The poet tells us how he went with two friends
from the city to attend a festival given by farmers, who
were offering first-fruits to Demeter from the store of
barley with which she had filled their barns. The day
was warm, indeed so hot that the very lizards, which
love to bask and run about in the sun, were slumbering in
the crevices of the stone-walls, and not a lark soared
carolling into the blue vault of heaven. Yet despite the
great heat there were everywhere signs of autumn. <q>All
things,</q> says the poet, <q>smelt of summer, but smelt of
autumn too.</q> Indeed the day was really autumnal; for a
goat-herd who met the friends on their way to the rural
merry-making, asked them whether they were bound for the
treading of the grapes in the wine-presses. And when they
had reached their destination and reclined at ease in the
dappled shade of over-arching poplars and elms, with the
babble of a neighbouring fountain, the buzz of the cicadas,
the hum of bees, and the cooing of doves in their ears, the
ripe apples and pears rolled in the grass at their feet and
the branches of the wild-plum trees were bowed down to the
earth with the weight of their purple fruit. So couched on
soft beds of fragrant lentisk they passed the sultry hours
singing ditties alternately, while a rustic image of Demeter,
to whom the honours of the day were paid, stood smiling
beside a heap of yellow grain on the threshing-floor, with
corn-stalks and poppies in her hands.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
harvest-home
described
by
Theocritus
fell in
autumn.</note>
In this description the time of year when the harvest-home
was celebrated is clearly marked. Apart from the
mention of the ripe apples, pears, and plums, the reference
to the treading of the grapes is decisive. The Greeks gather
and press the grapes in the first half of October,<note place='foot'>In ancient Greece the vintage
seems to have fallen somewhat earlier;
for Hesiod bids the husbandman gather
the ripe clusters at the time when
Arcturus is a morning star, which in
the poet's age was on the 18th of
September. See Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and
Days</hi>, 609 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch
der mathematischen und technischen
Chronologie</hi>, i. 247.</note> and
accordingly it is to this date that the harvest-festival described
by Theocritus must be assigned. At the present
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
day in Greece the maize-harvest immediately precedes the
vintage, the grain being reaped and garnered at the end of
September. Travelling in rural districts of Argolis and
Arcadia at that time of the year you pass from time to time
piles of the orange-coloured cobs laid up ready to be shelled,
or again heaps of the yellow grain beside the pods. But
maize was unknown to the ancient Greeks, who, like
their modern descendants, reaped their wheat and barley
crops much earlier in the summer, usually from the end of
April till June.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 190 note 2.</note> However, we may conclude that the day
immortalised by Theocritus was one of those autumn days
of great heat and effulgent beauty which in Greece may
occur at any time up to the very verge of winter. I
remember such a day at Panopeus on the borders of Phocis
and Boeotia. It was the first of November, yet the sun
shone in cloudless splendour and the heat was so great, that
when I had examined the magnificent remains of ancient
Greek fortification-walls which crown the summit of the
hill, it was delicious to repose on a grassy slope in the shade
of some fine holly-oaks and to inhale the sweet scent of the
wild thyme, which perfumed all the air. But it was summer's
farewell. Next morning the weather had completely changed.
A grey November sky lowered sadly overhead, and grey
mists hung like winding-sheets on the lower slopes of
the barren mountains which shut in the fatal plain of
Chaeronea.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Greeks
seem to
have deferred
the
offering of
first-fruits
till the
autumn in
order to
propitiate
the Corn
Goddess
at the
moment of
ploughing
and sowing,
when
her help
was
urgently
needed.</note>
Thus we may infer that in the rural districts of ancient
Greece farmers offered their first-fruits of the barley harvest
to Demeter in autumn about the time when the grapes were
being trodden in the wine-presses and the ripe apples and
pears littered the ground in the orchards. At first sight the
lateness of the festival in the year is surprising; for in the
lowlands of Greece at the present day barley is reaped at
the end of April and wheat in May,<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 190 note 2.</note> and in antiquity the
time of harvest would seem not to have been very different,
for Hesiod bids the husbandman put the sickle to the corn
at the morning rising of the Pleiades,<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 383 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> which in his time
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
took place on the eleventh of May.<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. 242.</note> But if the harvest was
reaped in spring or early summer, why defer the offerings
of corn to the Corn Goddess until the middle of autumn?
The reason for the delay is not, so far as I am aware,
explained by any ancient author, and accordingly it must
remain for us a matter of conjecture. I surmise that the
reason may have been a calculation on the part of the
practical farmer that the best time to propitiate the Corn
Goddess was not after harvest, when he had got all that was
to be got out of her, but immediately before ploughing and
sowing, when he had everything to hope from her good-will
and everything to fear from her displeasure. When he had
reaped his corn, and the sheaves had been safely garnered
in his barns, he might, so to say, snap his fingers at the
Corn Goddess. What could she do for him on the bare
stubble-field which lay scorched and baking under the fierce
rays of the sun all the long rainless summer through? But
matters wore a very different aspect when, with the shortening
and cooling of the days, he began to scan the sky for
clouds<note place='foot'>Compare Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Oeconomicus</hi>,
17, ἐπειδὰν γὰρ ὁ μετοπωρινὸς χρόνος
ἔλθῃ, πάντες που οἱ ἄνθρωποι πρὸς τὸν
θέον ἀποβλέπουσιν, ὅποτε βρέξας τὴν
γῆν ἀφήσει αὐτοὺς σπείρειν.</note> and to listen for the cries of the cranes as they flew
southward, heralding by their trumpet-like notes the approach
of the autumnal rains. Then he knew that the time had
come to break up the ground that it might receive the seed
and be fertilised by the refreshing water of heaven; then he
bethought him of the Corn Goddess once more and brought
forth from the grange a share of the harvested corn with
which to woo her favour and induce her to quicken the grain
which he was about to commit to the earth. On this theory
the Greek offering of first-fruits was prompted not so much
by gratitude for past favours as by a shrewd eye to favours to
come, and perhaps this interpretation of the custom does no
serious injustice to the cool phlegmatic temper of the bucolic
mind, which is more apt to be moved by considerations of profit
than by sentiment. At all events the reasons suggested for
delaying the harvest-festival accord perfectly with the natural
conditions and seasons of farming in Greece. For in that
country the summer is practically rainless, and during the
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
long months of heat and drought the cultivation of the two
ancient cereals, barley and wheat, is at a standstill. The
first rains of autumn fall about the middle of October,<note place='foot'>August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi>, p. 193.</note> and
that was the Greek farmer's great time for ploughing and
sowing.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Hence we should expect him to make his offering
of first-fruits to the Corn Goddess shortly before he ploughed
and sowed, and this expectation is entirely confirmed by
the date which we have inferred for the offering from the
evidence of Theocritus. Thus the sacrifice of barley to
Demeter in the autumn would seem to have been not so
much a thank-offering as a bribe judiciously administered
to her at the very moment of all the year when her services
were most urgently wanted.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The festival
of the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>
(<q>Before
the Ploughing</q>)
held
at Eleusis
in honour
of
Demeter.</note>
When with the progress of civilisation a number of
petty agricultural communities have merged into a single
state dependent for its subsistence mainly on the cultivation
of the ground, it commonly happens that, though
every farmer continues to perform for himself the simple old
rites designed to ensure the blessing of the gods on his
crops, the government undertakes to celebrate similar, though
more stately and elaborate, rites on behalf of the whole
people, lest the neglect of public worship should draw down
on the country the wrath of the offended deities. Hence it
comes about that, for all their pomp and splendour, the
national festivals of such states are often merely magnified
and embellished copies of homely rites and uncouth observances
carried out by rustics in the open fields, in barns,
and on threshing-floors. In ancient Egypt the religion of
Isis and Osiris furnishes examples of solemnities which have
been thus raised from the humble rank of rural festivities
to the dignity of national celebrations;<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and in ancient
Greece a like development may be traced in the religion of
Demeter. If the Greek ploughman prayed to Demeter and
Underground Zeus for a good crop before he put his hand
to the plough in autumn, the authorities of the Athenian
state celebrated about the same time and for the same
purpose a public festival in honour of Demeter at Eleusis.
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
It was called the Proerosia, which signifies <q>Before the
Ploughing</q>; and as the festival was dedicated to her,
Demeter herself bore the name of Proerosia. Tradition ran
that once on a time the whole world was desolated by a
famine, and that to remedy the evil the Pythian oracle bade
the Athenians offer the sacrifice of the Proerosia on behalf
of all men. They did so, and the famine ceased accordingly.
Hence to testify their gratitude for the deliverance people
sent the first-fruits of their harvest from all quarters to
Athens.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi>,
720; Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv</hi>. εἰρεσιώνη and
προηροσίαι; <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>,
Hesychius, and Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
προηρόσια; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Septem Sapientum
Convivium</hi>, 15; Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 521,
line 29, and No. 628; Aug.
Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im
Altertum</hi> (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 192
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The inscriptions prove that the
Proerosia was held at Eleusis and that
it was distinct from the Great Mysteries,
being mentioned separately from them.
Some of the ancients accounted for
the origin of the festival by a universal
plague instead of a universal famine.
But this version of the story no doubt
arose from the common confusion between
the similar Greek words for plague
and famine (λοιμός and λιμός). That
in the original version famine and not
plague must have been alleged as the
reason for instituting the Proerosia,
appears plainly from the reference of
the name to ploughing, from the dedication
of the festival to Demeter, and
from the offerings of first-fruits; for
these circumstances, though quite appropriate
to ceremonies designed to
stay or avert dearth and famine, would
be quite inappropriate in the case of
a plague.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>
seems to
have been
held before
the ploughing
in
October
but after
the Great
Mysteries
in September. However,
the date of
the Great
Mysteries,
being
determined
by the
lunar
calendar,
must have
fluctuated
in the solar
year;
whereas
the date
of the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>,
being
determined
by observation
of
Arcturus,
must have
been fixed.</note>
But the exact date at which the Proerosia or Festival
before Ploughing took place is somewhat uncertain, and enquirers
are divided in opinion as to whether it fell before or
after the Great Mysteries, which began on the fifteenth or
sixteenth of Boedromion, a month corresponding roughly to
our September. Another name for the festival was Proarcturia,
that is, <q>Before Arcturus,</q><note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> προηρόσια.</note> which points to a date
either before the middle of September, when Arcturus is a
morning star, or before the end of October, when Arcturus
is an evening star.<note place='foot'>August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi>, p. 194.</note> In favour of the earlier date it may be
said, first, that the morning phase of Arcturus was well
known and much observed, because it marked the middle of
autumn, whereas little use was made of the evening phase of
Arcturus for the purpose of dating;<note place='foot'>August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> and, second, that in an
official Athenian inscription the Festival before Ploughing
(<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>) is mentioned immediately before the Great
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
Mysteries.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 521, lines 29 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On the other hand, in favour of the later date, it may
be said that as the autumnal rains in Greece set in about the
middle of October, the latter part of that month would be a
more suitable time for a ceremony at the opening of ploughing
than the middle of September, when the soil is still parched
with the summer drought; and, second, that this date is confirmed
by a Greek inscription of the fourth or third century
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, found at Eleusis, in which the Festival before Ploughing
is apparently mentioned in the month of Pyanepsion immediately
before the festival of the Pyanepsia, which was
held on the seventh day of that month.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 628.</note> It is difficult to
decide between these conflicting arguments, but on the whole
I incline, not without hesitation, to agree with some eminent
modern authorities in placing the Festival before Ploughing
in Pyanepsion (October) after the Mysteries, rather than in
Boedromion (September) before the Mysteries.<note place='foot'>The view that the Festival before
Ploughing (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>) fell in Pyanepsion
is accepted by W. Mannhardt and W.
Dittenberger. See W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi> (Berlin,
1877), pp. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 258; Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
note 2 on Inscr. No. 628 (vol. ii. pp.
423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). The view that the Festival
before Ploughing fell in Boedromion
is maintained by August Mommsen.
See his <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi> (Leipsic, 1864),
pp. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic, 1898),
pp. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> However, we
must bear in mind that as the Attic months, like the Greek
months generally, were lunar,<note place='foot'>See below, p. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</note> their position in the solar year
necessarily varied from year to year, and though these variations
were periodically corrected by intercalation, nevertheless
the beginning of each Attic month sometimes diverged by
several weeks from the beginning of the corresponding
month to which we equate it.<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>
(Berlin, 1825-1826), i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; compare
August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Chronologie</hi>
(Leipsic, 1883), pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> From this it follows that the
Great Mysteries, which were always dated by the calendar
month, must have annually shifted their place somewhat in
the solar year; whereas the Festival before Ploughing, if it was
indeed dated either by the morning or by the evening phase
of Arcturus, must have occupied a fixed place in the solar
year. Hence it appears to be not impossible that the Great
Mysteries, oscillating to and fro with the inconstant moon,
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
may sometimes have fallen before and sometimes after the
Festival before Ploughing, which apparently always remained
true to the constant star. At least this possibility, which seems
to have been overlooked by previous enquirers, deserves to
be taken into account. It is a corollary from the shifting
dates of the lunar months that the official Greek calendar, in
spite of its appearance of exactness, really furnished the
ancient farmer with little trustworthy guidance as to the
proper seasons for conducting the various operations of agriculture;
and he was well advised in trusting to various
natural timekeepers, such as the rising and setting of the
constellations, the arrival and departure of the migratory
birds, the flowering of certain plants,<note place='foot'>For example, Theophrastus notes
that squills flowered thrice a year, and
that each flowering marked the time
for one of the three ploughings. See
Theophrastus, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Plantarum</hi>, vii.
13. 6.</note> the ripening of fruits,
and the setting in of the rains, rather than to the fallacious
indications of the public calendar. It is by natural timekeepers,
and not by calendar months, that Hesiod determines
the seasons of the farmer's year in the poem which is the
oldest existing treatise on husbandry.<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 383 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
The poet indeed refers (<hi rend='italic'>vv.</hi> 765 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>)
to days of the month as proper times
for engaging in certain tasks; but such
references are always simply to days
of the lunar month and apply equally
to every month; they are never to days
as dates in the solar year.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Offerings of
the first-fruits
of the
barley and
wheat to
Demeter
and Persephone
at
Eleusis. Isocrates
on the
offerings of
first-fruits
at Eleusis.</note>
Just as the ploughman's prayer to Demeter, before he
drove the share through the clods of the field, was taken up
and reverberated, so to say, with a great volume of sound
in the public prayers which the Athenian state annually
offered to the goddess before the ploughing on behalf of the
whole world, so the simple first-fruits of barley, presented to
the rustic Demeter under the dappled shade of rustling
poplars and elms on the threshing-floor in Cos, were repeated
year by year on a grander scale in the first-fruits of the
barley and wheat harvest, which were presented to the Corn
Mother and the Corn Maiden at Eleusis, not merely by
every husbandman in Attica, but by all the allies and
subjects of Athens far and near, and even by many
free Greek communities beyond the sea. The reason
why year by year these offerings of grain poured from
far countries into the public granaries at Eleusis, was
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
the widespread belief that the gift of corn had been first
bestowed by Demeter on the Athenians and afterwards
disseminated by them among all mankind through the
agency of Triptolemus, who travelled over the world in
his dragon-drawn car teaching all peoples to plough the
earth and to sow the seed.<note place='foot'>See below, p. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</note> In the fifth century before our
era the legend was celebrated by Sophocles in a play called
<hi rend='italic'>Triptolemus</hi>, in which he represented Demeter instructing
the hero to carry the seed of the fruits which she had
bestowed on men to all the coasts of Southern Italy,<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> i. 12. 2.</note> from
which we may infer that the cities of Magna Graecia were
among the number of those that sent the thank-offering of
barley and wheat every year to Athens. Again, in the
fourth century before our era Xenophon represents Callias,
the braggart Eleusinian Torchbearer, addressing the
Lacedaemonians in a set speech, in which he declared
that <q>Our ancestor Triptolemus is said to have bestowed the
seed of Demeter's corn on the Peloponese before any other
land. How then,</q> he asked with pathetic earnestness, <q>can
it be right that you should come to ravage the corn of the
men from whom you received the seed?</q><note place='foot'>Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Graeca</hi>, vi.
3. 6.</note> Again, writing
in the fourth century before our era Isocrates relates with
a swell of patriotic pride how, in her search for her lost
daughter Persephone, the goddess Demeter came to Attica
and gave to the ancestors of the Athenians the two greatest
of all gifts, the gift of the corn and the gift of the mysteries,
of which the one reclaimed men from the life of beasts and
the other held out hopes to them of a blissful eternity beyond
the grave. The antiquity of the tradition, the orator proceeds
to say, was no reason for rejecting it, but quite the
contrary it furnished a strong argument in its favour, for
what many affirmed and all had heard might be accepted as
trustworthy. <q>And moreover,</q> he adds, <q>we are not driven
to rest our case merely on the venerable age of the tradition;
we can appeal to stronger evidence in its support. For
most of the cities send us every year the first-fruits of the
corn as a memorial of that ancient benefit, and when any of
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
them have failed to do so the Pythian priestess has commanded
them to send the due portions of the fruits and to
act towards our city according to ancestral custom. Can
anything be supported by stronger evidence than by the
oracle of god, the assent of many Greeks, and the harmony
of ancient legend with the deeds of to-day?</q><note place='foot'>Isocrates, <hi rend='italic'>Panegyric</hi>, 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Athenian
decree concerning
the offerings
of
first-fruits
at Eleusis.</note>
This testimony of Isocrates to the antiquity both of
the legend and of the custom might perhaps have been set
aside, or at least disparaged, as the empty bombast of a
wordy rhetorician, if it had not happened by good chance
to be amply confirmed by an official decree of the Athenian
people passed in the century before Isocrates wrote. The
decree was found inscribed on a stone at Eleusis and is
dated by scholars in the latter half of the fifth century before
our era, sometime between 446 and 420 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi><note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 20 (vol. i.
pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>); E. S. Roberts and E. A.
Gardner, <hi rend='italic'>An Introduction to Greek
Epigraphy</hi>, Part ii. (Cambridge, 1905)
No. 9, pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It deals
with the first-fruits of barley and wheat which were offered
to the Two Goddesses, that is, to Demeter and Persephone,
not only by the Athenians and their allies but by the
Greeks in general. It prescribes the exact amount of barley
and wheat which was to be offered by the Athenians and
their allies, and it directs the highest officials at Eleusis,
namely the Hierophant and the Torchbearer, to exhort the
other Greeks at the mysteries to offer likewise of the first-fruits
of the corn. The authority alleged in the decree for requiring
or inviting offerings of first-fruits alike from Athenians
and from foreigners is ancestral custom and the bidding of
the Delphic oracle. The Senate is further enjoined to
send commissioners, so far as it could be done, to all
Greek cities whatsoever, exhorting, though not commanding,
them to send the first-fruits in compliance with ancestral
custom and the bidding of the Delphic oracle, and the state
officials are directed to receive the offerings from such states in
the same manner as the offerings of the Athenians and their
allies. Instructions are also given for the building of three
subterranean granaries at Eleusis, where the contributions
of grain from Attica were to be stored. The best of the corn
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
was to be offered in sacrifice as the Eumolpids might direct:
oxen were to be bought and sacrificed, with gilt horns, not
only to the two Goddesses but also to the God (Pluto),
Triptolemus, Eubulus, and Athena; and the remainder of
the grain was to be sold and with the produce votive offerings
were to be dedicated with inscriptions setting forth that they
had been dedicated from the offerings of first-fruits, and
recording the names of all the Greeks who sent the offerings
to Eleusis. The decree ends with a prayer that all who
comply with these injunctions or exhortations and render
their dues to the city of Athens and to the Two Goddesses,
may enjoy prosperity together with good and abundant crops.
Writing in the second century of our era, under the Roman
empire, the rhetorician Aristides records the custom which
the Greeks observed of sending year by year the first-fruits
of the harvest to Athens in gratitude for the corn, but he
speaks of the practice as a thing of the past.<note place='foot'>Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>Panathen.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eleusin.</hi>,
vol. i. pp. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 417 ed. G. Dindorf
(Leipsic, 1829).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Even after
foreign
states
ceased to
send first-fruits
of the
corn to
Eleusis,
they continued
to
acknowledge
the
benefit
which the
Athenians
had conferred
on
mankind
by diffusing
among
them
Demeter's
gift of
the corn. Testimony
of the
Sicilian
historian
Diodorus. Testimony
of Cicero
and
Himerius.</note>
We may suspect that the tribute of corn ceased to flow
from far countries to Athens, when, with her falling fortunes
and decaying empire, her proud galleys had ceased to carry
the terror of the Athenian arms into distant seas. But if
the homage was no longer paid in the substantial shape of
cargoes of grain, it continued down to the latest days of
paganism to be paid in the cheaper form of gratitude for
that inestimable benefit, which the Athenians claimed to have
received from the Corn Goddess and to have liberally communicated
to the rest of mankind. Even the Sicilians, who,
inhabiting a fertile corn-growing island, worshipped Demeter
and Persephone above all the gods and claimed to have been
the first to receive the gift of the corn from the Corn Goddess,<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, v. 2 and 4;
Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>In C. Verrem</hi>, act. ii. bk. iv.
chapters 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Both writers mention
that the whole of Sicily was deemed
sacred to Demeter and Persephone,
and that corn was said to have grown
in the island before it appeared anywhere
else. In support of the latter
claim Diodorus Siculus (v. 2. 4) asserts
that wheat grew wild in many parts of
Sicily.</note>
nevertheless freely acknowledged that the Athenians
had spread, though they had not originated, the useful
discovery among the nations. Thus the patriotic Sicilian
historian Diodorus, while giving the precedence to his fellow-countrymen,
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
strives to be just to the Athenian pretensions
in the following passage.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, v. 4.</note> <q>Mythologists,</q> says he, <q>relate
that Demeter, unable to find her daughter, lit torches at the
craters of Etna<note place='foot'>This legend, which is mentioned
also by Cicero (<hi rend='italic'>In C. Verrem</hi>, act. ii.
bk. iv. ch. 48), was no doubt told to
explain the use of torches in the
mysteries of Demeter and Persephone.
The author of the Homeric <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to
Demeter</hi> tells us (verses 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) that
Demeter searched for her lost daughter
for nine days with burning torches in
her hands, but he does not say that the
torches were kindled at the flames of
Etna. In art Demeter and Persephone
and their attendants were often represented
with torches in their hands. See
L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek
States</hi>, iii. (Oxford, 1907) plates xiii.,
xv. <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, xvi., xvii., xviii., xix., xx., xxi. <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>,
xxv., xxvii. <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>. Perhaps the legend of the
torchlight search for Persephone and
the use of the torches in the mysteries
may have originated in a custom of
carrying fire about the fields as a charm
to secure sunshine for the corn. See
<hi rend='italic'>The Golden Bough</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> iii. 313.</note> and roamed over many parts of the world.
Those people who received her best she rewarded by giving
them in return the fruit of the wheat; and because the
Athenians welcomed her most kindly of all, she bestowed
the fruit of the wheat on them next after the Sicilians.
Wherefore that people honoured the goddess more than any
other folk by magnificent sacrifices and the mysteries at
Eleusis, which for their extreme antiquity and sanctity have
become famous among all men. From the Athenians many
others received the boon of the corn and shared the seed
with their neighbours, till they filled the whole inhabited
earth with it. But as the people of Sicily, on account of
the intimate relation in which they stood to Demeter and
the Maiden, were the first to participate in the newly
discovered corn, they appointed sacrifices and popular
festivities in honour of each of the two goddesses, naming
the celebrations after them and signifying the nature of the
boons they had received by the dates of the festivals. For
they celebrated the bringing home of the Maiden at the time
when the corn was ripe, performing the sacrifice and holding
the festivity with all the solemnity and zeal that might be
reasonably expected of men who desired to testify their
gratitude for so signal a gift bestowed on them before all
the rest of mankind. But the sacrifice to Demeter they
assigned to the time when the sowing of the corn begins;
and for ten days they hold a popular festivity which bears
the name of the goddess, and is remarkable as well for the
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
magnificence of its pomp as for the costumes then worn in
imitation of the olden time. During these days it is customary
for people to rail at each other in foul language,
because when Demeter was mourning for the rape of the
Maiden she laughed at a ribald jest.</q><note place='foot'>The words which I have translated
<q>the bringing home of the Maiden</q>
(τῆς Κόρης τὴν καταγωγήν) are explained
with great probability by Professor M. P.
Nilsson as referring to the bringing of the
ripe corn to the barn or the threshing-floor
(<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>, Leipsic, 1906,
pp. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). This interpretation
accords perfectly with a well-attested
sense of καταγωγή and its cognate verb
κατάγειν, and is preferable to the other
possible interpretation <q>the bringing
down,</q> which would refer to the
descent of Persephone into the nether
world; for such a descent is hardly
appropriate to a harvest festival.</note> Thus despite his
natural prepossession in favour of his native land, Diodorus
bears testimony both to the special blessing bestowed on
the Athenians by the Corn Goddess, and to the generosity
with which they had imparted the blessing to others, until it
gradually spread to the ends of the earth. Again, Cicero,
addressing a Roman audience, enumerates among the benefits
which Athens was believed to have conferred on the world,
the gift of the corn and its origin in Attic soil; and the
cursory manner in which he alludes to it seems to prove that
the tradition was familiar to his hearers.<note place='foot'>Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>Pro L. Flacco</hi>, 26.</note> Four centuries
later the rhetorician Himerius speaks of Demeter's gift of
the corn and the mysteries to the Athenians as the source
of the first and greatest service rendered by their city to
mankind;<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> ii. 5.</note> so ancient, widespread, and persistent was the
legend which ascribed the origin of the corn to the goddess
Demeter and associated it with the institution of the
Eleusinian mysteries. No wonder that the Delphic oracle
called Athens <q>the Metropolis of the Corn.</q><note place='foot'>Μητρόπολις τῶν καρπῶν, Aristides,
<hi rend='italic'>Panathen.</hi> vol. i. p. 168 ed. G. Dindorf
(Leipzig, 1829).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Sicilians
seem to
have
associated
Demeter
with the
seed-corn
and Persephone
with the
ripe ears. Difficulty
of distinguishing
between
Demeter
and Persephone
as
personifications
of
different
aspects of
the corn.</note>
From the passage of Diodorus which I have quoted we
learn that the Sicilians celebrated the festival of Demeter
at the beginning of sowing, and the festival of Persephone at
harvest. This proves that they associated, if they did not
identify, the Mother Goddess with the seed-corn and the
Daughter Goddess with the ripe ears. Could any association
or identification be more easy and obvious to people
who personified the processes of nature under the form of
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
anthropomorphic deities? As the seed brings forth the ripe
ear, so the Corn Mother Demeter gave birth to the Corn
Daughter Persephone. It is true that difficulties arise when
we attempt to analyse this seemingly simple conception.
How, for example, are we to divide exactly the two persons
of the divinity? At what precise moment does the seed
cease to be the Corn Mother and begins to burgeon out
into the Corn Daughter? And how far can we identify the
material substance of the barley and wheat with the divine
bodies of the Two Goddesses? Questions of this sort probably
gave little concern to the sturdy swains who ploughed,
sowed, and reaped the fat fields of Sicily. We cannot imagine
that their night's rest was disturbed by uneasy meditations
on these knotty problems. It would hardly be strange if the
muzzy mind of the Sicilian bumpkin, who looked with blind
devotion to the Two Goddesses for his daily bread, totally
failed to distinguish Demeter from the seed and Persephone
from the ripe sheaves, and if he accepted implicitly
the doctrine of the real presence of the divinities in the corn
without discriminating too curiously between the material
and the spiritual properties of the barley or the wheat.
And if he had been closely questioned by a rigid logician as
to the exact distinction to be drawn between the two persons
of the godhead who together represented for him the annual
vicissitudes of the cereals, Hodge might have scratched his
head and confessed that it puzzled him to say where
precisely the one goddess ended and the other began, or
why the seed buried in the ground should figure at one time
as the dead daughter Persephone descending into the nether
world, and at another as the living Mother Demeter about
to give birth to next year's crop. Theological subtleties
like these have posed longer heads than are commonly to be
found on bucolic shoulders.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The time of
the year
when the
first-fruits
of the corn
were
offered to
Demeter
and Persephone
at
Eleusis is
not known.</note>
The time of year at which the first-fruits were offered
to Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis is not explicitly
mentioned by ancient authorities, and accordingly no
inference can be drawn from the date of the offering as
to its religious significance. It is true that at the Eleusinian
mysteries the Hierophant and Torchbearer publicly exhorted
the Greeks in general, as distinguished from the Athenians
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
and their allies, to offer the first-fruits in accordance with
ancestral custom and the bidding of the Delphic oracle.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 20, lines 25 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner,
<hi rend='italic'>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</hi>, ii.
(Cambridge, 1905) No. 9, lines 25
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, κελευέτω δὲ καί ὁ ἱεροφάντης καὶ ὁ
δᾳδοῦχος μυστηρίοις ἀπάρχεσθαι τοὺς
Ἔλληνας τοῦ καρποῦ κατὰ τὰ πάτρια καὶ
τὴν μαντείαν τὴν ἐγ Δελφῶν. By coupling
μυστηρίοις with ἀπάρχεσθαι instead
of with κελεύετω, Miss J. E. Harrison
understands the offering instead of the
exhortation to have been made at the
mysteries (<hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study of
Greek Religion</hi>, Second Edition, p. 155,
<q>Let the Hierophant and the Torchbearer
command that at the mysteries
the Hellenes should offer first-fruits of
their crops,</q> etc.). This interpretation
is no doubt grammatically permissible,
but the context seems to plead strongly,
if not to be absolutely decisive, in favour
of the other. It is to be observed
that the exhortation was addressed not
to the Athenians and their allies (who
were compelled to make the offering)
but only to the other Greeks, who
might make it or not as they pleased;
and the amount of such voluntary contributions
was probably small compared
to that of the compulsory contributions,
as to the date of which nothing is said.
That the proclamation to the Greeks in
general was an exhortation (κελευέτω),
not a command, is clearly shewn by
the words of the decree a few lines
lower down, where commissioners are
directed to go to all Greek states
exhorting but not commanding them
to offer the first-fruits (ἐκείνοις δὲ μὴ
ἐπιτάττοντας, κελεύοντας δὲ ἀπάρχεσθαι
ἐὰν βούλωνται κατὰ τὰ πάτρια καὶ τὴν
μαντείαν ἐγ Δελφῶν). The Athenians
could not command free and independent
states to make such offerings, still
less could they prescribe the exact date
when the offerings were to be made.
All that they could and did do was,
taking advantage of the great assembly
of Greeks from all quarters at the
mysteries, to invite or exhort, by the
mouth of the great priestly functionaries,
the foreigners to contribute.</note>
But there is nothing to shew that the offerings were made
immediately after the exhortation. Nor does any ancient
authority support the view of a modern scholar that the
offering of the first-fruits, or a portion of them, took place at
the Festival before Ploughing (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign>),<note place='foot'>August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic, 1898),
pp. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> though that festival
would no doubt be an eminently appropriate occasion for
propitiating with such offerings the goddess on whose bounty
the next year's crop was believed to depend.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Festival
of the
Threshing-floor
(<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Haloa</foreign>)
at Eleusis.</note>
On the other hand, we are positively told that the first-fruits
were carried to Eleusis to be used at the Festival of
the Threshing-floor (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Haloa</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Eustathius on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, ix.
534, p. 772; Im. Bekker, <hi rend='italic'>Anecdota
Graeca</hi>, i. 384 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἁλῶα. Compare
O. Rubensohn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Mysterienheiligtümer
in Eleusis und Samothrake</hi>
(Berlin, 1892), p. 116.</note> But the statement, cursorily
reported by writers of no very high authority, cannot be
implicitly relied upon; and even if it could, we should
hardly be justified in inferring from it that all the first-fruits
of the corn were offered to Demeter and Persephone at this
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
festival. Be that as it may, the Festival of the Threshing-floor
was intimately connected with the worship both of
Demeter and of Dionysus, and accordingly it deserves our
attention. It is said to have been sacred to both these
deities;<note place='foot'>Eustathius on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, ix.
534, p. 772; Im. Bekker, <hi rend='italic'>Anecdota
Graeca</hi>, i. 384 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἁλῶα.</note> and while the name seems to connect it rather
with the Corn Goddess than with the Wine God, we are
yet informed that it was held by the Athenians on the
occasion of the pruning of the vines and the tasting of the
stored-up wine.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scholia in Lucianum</hi>, ed. H. Rabe
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (scholium
on <hi rend='italic'>Dialog. Meretr.</hi> vii. 4).</note> The festival is frequently mentioned in
Eleusinian inscriptions, from some of which we gather
that it included sacrifices to the two goddesses and a so-called
Ancestral Contest, as to the nature of which we have
no information.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Nos. 192, 246,
587, 640; Ἐφημερὶς Ἀρχαιολογική,
1884, coll. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The passages of
inscriptions and of ancient authors
which refer to the festival are collected
by Dr. L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the
Greek States</hi>, iii. (Oxford, 1907) pp.
315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For a discussion of the
evidence see August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste
der Stadt Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic,
1898), pp. 359 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss J. E.
Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to the Study
of Greek Religion</hi>, Second Edition
(Cambridge, 1908), pp. 145 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> We may suppose that the festival or some
part of it was celebrated on the Sacred Threshing-floor
of Triptolemus at Eleusis;<note place='foot'>The threshing-floor of Triptolemus
at Eleusis (Pausanias, i. 38. 6) is no
doubt identical with the Sacred Threshing-floor
mentioned in the great
Eleusinian inscription of 329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
(Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587, line 234). We
read of a hierophant who, contrary to
ancestral custom, sacrificed a victim on
the hearth in the Hall at Eleusis during
the Festival of the Threshing-floor,
<q>it being unlawful to sacrifice victims
on that day</q> (Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Contra
Neaeram</hi>, 116, pp. 1384 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), but from
such an unlawful act no inference can
be drawn as to the place where the
festival was held. That the festival
probably had special reference to the
threshing-floor of Triptolemus has
already been pointed out by O. Rubensohn
(<hi rend='italic'>Die Mysterienheiligtümer in
Eleusis und Samothrake</hi>, Berlin, 1892,
p. 118).</note> for as Triptolemus was the
hero who is said to have diffused the knowledge of the
corn all over the world, nothing could be more natural
than that the Festival of the Threshing-floor should be
held on the sacred threshing-floor which bore his name.
As for Demeter, we have already seen how intimate was her
association with the threshing-floor and the operation of
threshing; according to Homer, she is the yellow goddess who
parts the yellow grain from the white chaff at the threshing,
and in Cos her image with the corn-stalks and the poppies
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
in her hands stood on the threshing-floor.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>. Maximus
Tyrius observes (<hi rend='italic'>Dissertat.</hi> xxx. 5) that
husbandmen were the first to celebrate
sacred rites in honour of Demeter at
the threshing-floor.</note> The festival
lasted one day, and no victims might be sacrificed at it;<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, note 4.</note> but
special use was made, as we have seen, of the first-fruits of
the corn. With regard to the dating of the festival we are
informed that it fell in the month Poseideon, which corresponds
roughly to our December, and as the date rests on
the high authority of the ancient Athenian antiquary Philochorus,<note place='foot'>Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἁλῶα (vol. i.
p. 24, ed. G. Dindorf).</note>
and is, moreover, indirectly confirmed by inscriptional
evidence,<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587, lines
124, 144, with the editor's notes;
August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi>, p. 360.</note> we are bound to accept it. But it is
certainly surprising to find a Festival of the Threshing-floor
held so late in the year, long after the threshing, which in
Greece usually takes place not later than midsummer, though
on high ground in Crete it is sometimes prolonged till near
the end of August.<note place='foot'>So I am informed by my friend
Professor J. L. Myres, who speaks
from personal observation.</note> We seem bound to conclude that the
Festival of the Threshing-floor was quite distinct from the
actual threshing of the corn.<note place='foot'>This is recognised by Professor
M. P. Nilsson. See his <hi rend='italic'>Studia de
Dionysiis Atticis</hi> (Lund, 1900), pp.
95 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, and his <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>, p.
329. To explain the lateness of the
festival, Miss J. E. Harrison suggests
that <q>the shift of date is due to
Dionysos. The rival festivals of
Dionysos were in mid-winter. He
possessed himself of the festivals of
Demeter, took over her threshing-floor
and compelled the anomaly of a winter
threshing festival</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to
the Study of Greek Religion</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 147).</note> It is said to have included
certain mystic rites performed by women alone, who feasted
and quaffed wine, while they broke filthy jests on each other
and exhibited cakes baked in the form of the male and female
organs of generation.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dial. Meretr.</hi>
vii. 4 (<hi rend='italic'>Scholia in Lucianum</hi>, ed. H.
Rabe, Leipsic, 1906, pp. 279-281).</note> If the latter particulars are correctly
reported we may suppose that these indecencies, like certain
obscenities which seem to have formed part of the Great
Mysteries at Eleusis,<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 15 and 20, pp. 13 and 17 ed.
Potter; Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus Nationes</hi>,
v. 25-27, 35, 39.</note> were no mere wanton outbursts of
licentious passion, but were deliberately practised as rites
calculated to promote the fertility of the ground by means
of homoeopathic or imitative magic. A like association of
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
what we might call indecency with rites intended to promote
the growth of the crops meets us in the Thesmophoria, a
festival of Demeter celebrated by women alone, at which
the character of the goddess as a source of fertility comes
out clearly in the custom of mixing the remains of the
sacrificial pigs with the seed-corn in order to obtain a
plentiful crop. We shall return to this festival later on.<note place='foot'>See below, p. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>; vol. ii. pp.
17 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Green
Festival
and the
Festival
of the
Cornstalks
at Eleusis.
Epithets of
Demeter
referring to
the corn.</note>
Other festivals held at Eleusis in honour of Demeter and
Persephone were known as the Green Festival and the
Festival of the Cornstalks.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 640; Ch.
Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</hi>
(Brussels, 1900), No. 135, p. 145.
To be exact, while the inscription
definitely mentions the sacrifices to
Demeter and Persephone at the
Green Festival, it does not record the
deities to whom the sacrifice at the
Festival of the Cornstalks (τὴν τῶν
Καλαμαίων θυσίαν) was offered. But
mentioned as it is in immediate connexion
with the sacrifices to Demeter
and Persephone at the Green Festival,
we may fairly suppose that the sacrifice
at the Festival of the Cornstalks was
also offered to these goddesses.</note> Of the manner of their celebration
we know nothing except that they comprised sacrifices,
which were offered to Demeter and Persephone. But their
names suffice to connect the two festivals with the green
and the standing corn. We have seen that Demeter
herself bore the title of Green, and that sacrifices were
offered to her under that title which plainly aimed at promoting
fertility.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</note> Among the many epithets applied to
Demeter which mark her relation to the corn may further
be mentioned <q>Wheat-lover,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Anthologia Palatina</hi>, vi. 36. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> <q>She of the Corn,</q><note place='foot'>Polemo, cited by Athenaeus, iii.
9, p. 416 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> <q>Sheaf-bearer,</q><note place='foot'>Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> xvii. 153. The
Athenians sacrificed to her under this
title (Eustathius, on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>,
xviii. 553, p. 1162).</note>
<q>She of the Threshing-floor,</q><note place='foot'>Theocritus, <hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> vii. 155; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>,
xl. 5.</note> <q>She of the Winnowing-fan,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Anthologia Palatina</hi>, vi. 98. 1.</note>
<q>Nurse of the Corn-ears,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, xl. 3.</note> <q>Crowned with
Ears of Corn,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Anthologia Palatina</hi>, vi. 104. 8.</note> <q>She of the Seed,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, xl. 5.</note> <q>She of the Green
Fruits,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> <q>Heavy with Summer Fruits,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, xl. 18.</note> <q>Fruit-bearer,</q><note place='foot'>This title she shared with Persephone
at Tegea (Pausanias, viii. 53. 7),
and under it she received annual sacrifices
at Ephesus (Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 655).
It was applied to her also at Epidaurus
(Ἐφημ. Ἀρχ., 1883, col. 153) and at
Athens (Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 382), and
appears to have been a common title of
the goddess. See L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The
Cults of the Greek States</hi>, iii. 318 note 30.</note>
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
<q>She of the Great Loaf,</q> and <q>She of the Great Barley
Loaf.</q><note place='foot'>Polemo, cited by Athenaeus, iii.
73, p. 109 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, x. 9. p. 416 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> Of these epithets it may be remarked that though
all of them are quite appropriate to a Corn Goddess, some
of them would scarcely be applicable to an Earth Goddess
and therefore they add weight to the other arguments which
turn the scale in favour of the corn as the fundamental
attribute of Demeter.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief in
ancient
and
modern
times that
the corn-crops
depend on
possession
of an
image of
Demeter.</note>
How deeply implanted in the mind of the ancient
Greeks was this faith in Demeter as goddess of the corn
may be judged by the circumstance that the faith actually
persisted among their Christian descendants at her old
sanctuary of Eleusis down to the beginning of the nineteenth
century. For when the English traveller Dodwell revisited
Eleusis, the inhabitants lamented to him the loss of a
colossal image of Demeter, which was carried off by Clarke
in 1802 and presented to the University of Cambridge,
where it still remains. <q>In my first journey to Greece,</q>
says Dodwell, <q>this protecting deity was in its full glory,
situated in the centre of a threshing-floor, amongst the ruins
of her temple. The villagers were impressed with a persuasion
that their rich harvests were the effect of her bounty,
and since her removal, their abundance, as they assured me,
has disappeared.</q><note place='foot'>E. Dodwell, <hi rend='italic'>A Classical and
Topographical Tour through Greece</hi>
(London, 1819), i. 583. E. D. Clarke
found the image <q>on the side of the
road, immediately before entering the
village, and in the midst of a heap of
dung, buried as high as the neck, a
little beyond the farther extremity of
the pavement of the temple. Yet even
this degrading situation had not been
assigned to it wholly independent of its
antient history. The inhabitants of
the small village which is now situated
among the ruins of Eleusis still regarded
this statue with a very high
degree of superstitious veneration.
They attributed to its presence the
fertility of their land; and it was for
this reason that they heaped around it
the manure intended for their fields.
They believed that the loss of it would
be followed by no less a calamity than
the failure of their annual harvests;
and they pointed to the ears of bearded
wheat, upon the sculptured ornaments
upon the head of the figure, as a never-failing
indication of the produce of the
soil.</q> When the statue was about to
be removed, a general murmur ran
among the people, the women joining
in the clamour. <q>They had been
always,</q> they said, <q>famous for their
corn; and the fertility of the land
would cease when the statue was
removed.</q> See E. D. Clarke, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in various Countries of Europe, Asia,
and Africa</hi>, iii. (London, 1814) pp. 772-774,
787 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J. C. Lawson,
<hi rend='italic'>Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient
Greek Religion</hi> (Cambridge, 1910),
p. 80, who tells us that <q>the statue
was regularly crowned with flowers
in the avowed hope of obtaining good
harvests.</q></note> Thus we see the Corn Goddess Demeter
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
standing on the threshing-floor of Eleusis and dispensing
corn to her worshippers in the nineteenth century of the
Christian era, precisely as her image stood and dispensed
corn to her worshippers on the threshing-floor of Cos in the
days of Theocritus. And just as the people of Eleusis last
century attributed the diminution of their harvests to the
loss of the image of Demeter, so in antiquity the Sicilians,
a corn-growing people devoted to the worship of the two
Corn Goddesses, lamented that the crops of many towns had
perished because the unscrupulous Roman governor Verres
had impiously carried off the image of Demeter from her
famous temple at Henna.<note place='foot'>Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>In C. Verrem</hi>, act. ii. lib.
iv. 51.</note> Could we ask for a clearer proof
that Demeter was indeed the goddess of the corn than this
belief, held by the Greeks down to modern times, that the
corn-crops depended on her presence and bounty and
perished when her image was removed?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacred
marriage
of Zeus
and
Demeter
at Eleusis. Homer on
the love of
Zeus for
Demeter.
Zeus the
Sky God
may have
been
confused
with Subterranean
Zeus, that
is, Pluto. Demeter
may have
been confused
with
Persephone;
in art the
types of
the two
goddesses
are often
very
similar.</note>
In a former part of this work I followed an eminent
French scholar in concluding, from various indications, that
part of the religious drama performed in the mysteries of
Eleusis may have been a marriage between the sky-god
Zeus and the corn-goddess Demeter, represented by the
hierophant and the priestess of the goddess respectively.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The conclusion is arrived at by combining a number of
passages, all more or less vague and indefinite, of late
Christian writers; hence it must remain to some extent
uncertain and cannot at the best lay claim to more than
a fair degree of probability. It may be, as Professor W.
Ridgeway holds, that this dramatic marriage of the god and
goddess was an innovation foisted into the Eleusinian
Mysteries in that great welter of religions which followed
the meeting of the East and the West in the later ages of
antiquity.<note place='foot'>This view was expressed by my
friend Professor Ridgeway in a paper
which I had the advantage of hearing
him read at Cambridge in the
early part of 1911. Compare <hi rend='italic'>The
Athenaeum</hi>, No. 4360, May 20th,
1911, p. 576.</note> If a marriage of Zeus and Demeter did indeed
form an important feature of the Mysteries in the fifth century
before our era, it is certainly remarkable, as Professor
Ridgeway has justly pointed out, that no mention of Zeus
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
occurs in the public decree of that century which regulates
the offerings of first-fruits and the sacrifices to be made to
the gods and goddesses of Eleusis.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 20; E. S. Roberts
and E. A. Gardner, <hi rend='italic'>Introduction to Greek
Epigraphy</hi>, ii. (Cambridge, 1905) No.
9, pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See above, pp. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At the same time we
must bear in mind that, if the evidence for the ritual marriage
of Zeus and Demeter is late and doubtful, the evidence for
the myth is ancient and indubitable. The story was known
to Homer, for in the list of beauties to whom he makes
Zeus, in a burst of candour, confess that he had lost his too
susceptible heart, there occurs the name of <q>the fair-haired
Queen Demeter</q>;<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xiv. 326.</note> and in another passage the poet represents
the jealous god smiting with a thunderbolt the favoured
lover with whom the goddess had forgotten her dignity
among the furrows of a fallow field.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, v. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Moreover, according
to one tradition, Dionysus himself was the offspring of the
intrigue between Zeus and Demeter.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, iii. 62. 6.</note> Thus there is no
intrinsic improbability in the view that one or other of these
unedifying incidents in the backstairs chronicle of Olympus
should have formed part of the sacred peep-show in the
Eleusinian Mysteries. But it seems just possible that the
marriage to which the Christian writers allude with malicious
joy may after all have been of a more regular and orthodox
pattern. We are positively told that the rape of Persephone
was acted at the Mysteries;<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
12, p. 12, ed. Potter.</note> may that scene not have
been followed by another representing the solemnisation of
her nuptials with her ravisher and husband Pluto? It is to
be remembered that Pluto was sometimes known as a god
of fertility under the title of Subterranean Zeus. It was to
him under that title as well as to Demeter, that the Greek
ploughman prayed at the beginning of the ploughing;<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 465 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and
the people of Myconus used to sacrifice to Subterranean
Zeus and Subterranean Earth for the prosperity of the crops
on the twelfth day of the month Lenaeon.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 615, lines 25
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi>, No. 714; J. de Prott et L.
Ziehen, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Graecorum Sacrae</hi>, No. 4.</note> Thus it may
be that the Zeus whose marriage was dramatically represented
at the Mysteries was not the sky-god Zeus, but his
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
brother Zeus of the Underworld, and that the writers who
refer to the ceremony have confused the two brothers. This
view, if it could be established, would dispose of the difficulty
raised by the absence of the name of Zeus in the decree
which prescribes the offerings to be made to the gods of
Eleusis; for although in that decree Pluto is not mentioned
under the name of Subterranean Zeus, he is clearly referred
to, as the editors of the inscription have seen, under the
vague title of <q>the God,</q> while his consort Persephone is
similarly referred to under the title of <q>the Goddess,</q> and it
is ordained that perfect victims shall be sacrificed to both of
them. However, if we thus dispose of one difficulty, it
must be confessed that in doing so we raise another. For
if the bridegroom in the Sacred Marriage at Eleusis was
not the sky-god Zeus, but the earth-god Pluto, we seem
driven to suppose that, contrary to the opinion of the reverend
Christian scandal-mongers, the bride was his lawful wife
Persephone and not his sister and mother-in-law Demeter.
In short, on the hypothesis which I have suggested we are
compelled to conclude that the ancient busybodies who
lifted the veil from the mystic marriage were mistaken as to
the person both of the divine bridegroom and of the divine
bride. In regard to the bridegroom I have conjectured
that they may have confused the two brothers, Zeus of the
Upper World and Zeus of the Lower World. In regard to
the bride, can any reason be suggested for confounding the
persons of the mother and daughter? On the view here
taken of the nature of Demeter and Persephone nothing
could be easier than to confuse them with each other,
for both of them were mythical embodiments of the corn,
the mother Demeter standing for the old corn of last year
and the daughter Persephone standing for the new corn of
this year. In point of fact Greek artists, both of the archaic
and of later periods, frequently represent the Mother
and Daughter side by side in forms which resemble each
other so closely that eminent modern experts have sometimes
differed from each other on the question, which
is Demeter and which is Persephone; indeed in some
cases it might be quite impossible to distinguish the
two if it were not for the inscriptions attached to the
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
figures.<note place='foot'>See L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of
the Greek States</hi>, iii. (Oxford, 1907), p.
259, <q>It was long before the mother
could be distinguished from the daughter
by any organic difference of form or by
any expressive trait of countenance.
On the more ancient vases and terracottas
they appear rather as twin-sisters,
almost as if the inarticulate artist were
aware of their original identity of substance.
And even among the monuments
of the transitional period it is
difficult to find any representation of
the goddesses in characters at once
clear and impressive. We miss this
even in the beautiful vase of Hieron in
the British Museum, where the divine
pair are seen with Triptolemos: the
style is delicate and stately, and there
is a certain impression of inner tranquil
life in the group, but without the aid
of the inscriptions the mother would
not be known from the daughter</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, vol. iii. 274, <q>But it would be
wrong to give the impression that the
numismatic artists of this period were
always careful to distinguish&mdash;in such
a manner as the above works indicate&mdash;between
mother and daughter. The
old idea of their unity of substance still
seemed to linger as an art-tradition:
the very type we have just been examining
appears on a fourth-century coin
of Hermione, and must have been used
here to designate Demeter Chthonia
who was there the only form that the
corn-goddess assumed. And even at
Metapontum, where coin-engraving
was long a great art, a youthful head
crowned with corn, which in its own
right and on account of its resemblance
to the masterpiece of Euainetos could
claim the name of Kore [Persephone], is
actually inscribed <q>Damater.</q></q> Compare
J. Overbeck, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Kunstmythologie</hi>,
iii. (Leipsic, 1873-1878),
p. 453. In regard, for example, to the
famous Eleusinian bas-relief, one of the
most beautiful monuments of ancient
religious art, which seems to represent
Demeter giving the corn-stalks to
Triptolemus, while Persephone crowns
his head, there has been much divergence
of opinion among the learned as
to which of the goddesses is Demeter
and which Persephone. See J. Overbeck,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 427 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R.
Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the
close resemblance of the artistic types
of Demeter and Persephone see further
E. Gerhard, <hi rend='italic'>Gesammelte akademische
Abhandlungen</hi> (Berlin, 1866-1868), ii.
357 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. Lenormant, in Daremberg
et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités
Grecques et Romaines</hi>, i. 2, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Ceres,</q> p. 1049.</note> The ancient sculptors, vase-painters, and engravers
must have had some good reason for portraying the two goddesses
in types which are almost indistinguishable from each
other; and what better reason could they have had than the
knowledge that the two persons of the godhead were one
in substance, that they stood merely for two different
aspects of the same simple natural phenomenon, the growth
of the corn? Thus it is easy to understand why Demeter
and Persephone may have been confused in ritual as well as
in art, why in particular the part of the divine bride in a
Sacred Marriage may sometimes have been assigned to the
Mother and sometimes to the Daughter. But all this, I
fully admit, is a mere speculation, and I only put it forward
as such. We possess far too little information as to a
Sacred Marriage in the Eleusinian Mysteries to be justified
in speaking with confidence on so obscure a subject.
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The date
of the
Eleusinian
Mysteries
in September
would
have been
a very appropriate
time for a
Sacred
Marriage
of the Sky
God with
the Corn
Goddess
or the
Earth
Goddess.</note>
One thing, however, which we may say with a fair
degree of probability is that, if such a marriage did take
place at Eleusis, no date in the agricultural year could well
have been more appropriate for it than the date at which
the Mysteries actually fell, namely about the middle of
September. The long Greek summer is practically rainless
and in the fervent heat and unbroken drought all nature
languishes. The river-beds are dry, the fields parched. The
farmer awaits impatiently the setting-in of the autumnal rains,
which begin in October and mark the great season for ploughing
and sowing. What time could be fitter for celebrating
the union of the Corn Goddess with her husband the Earth
God or perhaps rather with her paramour the Sky God, who
will soon descend in fertilising showers to quicken the seed
in the furrows? Such embraces of the divine powers or
their human representatives might well be deemed, on the
principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic, indispensable
to the growth of the crops. At least similar ideas have
been entertained and similar customs have been practised
by many peoples;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and in the legend of Demeter's love-adventure
among the furrows of the thrice-ploughed fallow<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, v. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
we seem to catch a glimpse of rude rites of the same sort
performed in the fields at sowing-time by Greek ploughmen
for the sake of ensuring the growth of the seed which they
were about to commit to the bosom of the naked earth. In
this connexion a statement of ancient writers as to the rites
of Eleusis receives fresh significance. We are told that at
these rites the worshippers looked up to the sky and cried
<q>Rain!</q> and then looked down at the earth and cried
<q>Conceive!</q><note place='foot'>Proclus, on Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi>, p.
293 c, quoted by L. F. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The
Cults of the Greek States</hi>, iii. 357,
where Lobeck's emendation of ὔε, κύε
for υἶε, τοκυῖε (<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 782)
may be accepted as certain, confirmed
as it is by Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refutatio Omnium
Haeresium</hi>, v. 7, p. 146, ed.
Duncker and Schneidewin (Göttingen,
1859), τὸ μέγα καὶ ἄρρητον Ἐλευσινίων
μυστήριον ὔε κύε.</note> Nothing could be more appropriate at a
marriage of the Sky God and the Earth or Corn Goddess
than such invocations to the heaven to pour down rain and
to the earth or the corn to conceive seed under the fertilising
shower; in Greece no time could well be more suitable for
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
the utterance of such prayers than just at the date when the
Great Mysteries of Eleusis were celebrated, at the end of
the long drought of summer and before the first rains of
autumn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Eleusinian
games
distinct
from the
Eleusinian
Mysteries.
The
Eleusinian
games
of later
origin
than the
Eleusinian
Mysteries. The
Eleusinian
games
sacred to
Demeter
and Persephone. Triptolemus,
the
mythical
hero of
the corn.</note>
Different both from the Great Mysteries and the offerings
of first-fruits at Eleusis were the games which were
celebrated there on a great scale once in every four years
and on a less scale once in every two years.<note place='foot'>As to the Eleusinian games see
August Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi>, pp. 179-204; P.
Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Les Grands Mystères d'Éleusis</hi>
(Paris, 1900), pp. 143-147; P. Stengel,
in Pauly-Wissowa's <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
v. coll. 2330 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The quadriennial
celebration of the Eleusinian Games is
mentioned by Aristotle (<hi rend='italic'>Constitution of
Athens</hi>, 54), and in the great Eleusinian
inscription of 329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, which is
also our only authority for the biennial
celebration of the games. See Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
No. 587, lines 258 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The
regular and official name of the games
was simply Eleusinia (τὰ Ἐλευσίνια),
a name which late writers applied incorrectly
to the Mysteries. See August
Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 587, note 171.</note> That the
games were distinct from the Mysteries is proved by
their periods, which were quadriennial and biennial respectively,
whereas the Mysteries were celebrated annually.
Moreover, in Greek epigraphy, our most authentic evidence
in such matters, the games and the Mysteries are clearly
distinguished from each other by being mentioned separately
in the same inscription.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 246, lines 25
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> No. 587, lines 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
258 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But like the Mysteries the
games seem to have been very ancient; for the Parian
Chronicler, who wrote in the year 264 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, assigns the
foundation of the Eleusinian games to the reign of Pandion,
the son of Cecrops. However, he represents them as of
later origin than the Eleusinian Mysteries, which according
to him were instituted by Eumolpus in the reign of
Erechtheus, after Demeter had planted corn in Attica and
Triptolemus had sown seed in the Rarian plain at Eleusis.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Marmor Parium</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta
Historicorum Graecorum</hi>, ed. C.
Müller, i. 544 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
This testimony to the superior antiquity of the Mysteries
is in harmony with our most ancient authority on the rites
of Eleusis, the author of the <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, who
describes the origin of the Eleusinian Mysteries, but makes
no reference or allusion to the Eleusinian Games. However,
the great age of the games is again vouched for at a much
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
later date by the rhetorician Aristides, who even declares
that they were the oldest of all Greek games.<note place='foot'>Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>Panathen.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Eleusin.</hi>
vol. i. pp. 168, 417, ed. G. Dindorf.</note> With
regard to the nature and meaning of the games our information
is extremely scanty, but an old scholiast on Pindar
tells us that they were celebrated in honour of Demeter and
Persephone as a thank-offering at the conclusion of the corn-harvest.<note place='foot'>Schol. on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> ix.
150, p. 228, ed. Aug. Boeckh.</note>
His testimony is confirmed by that of the
rhetorician Aristides, who mentions the institution of the
Eleusinian games in immediate connexion with the offerings
of the first-fruits of the corn, which many Greek states sent
to Athens;<note place='foot'>Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> and from an inscription dated about the close
of the third century before our era we learn that at the
Great Eleusinian Games sacrifices were offered to Demeter
and Persephone.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 246, lines 25
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The editor rightly points out
that the Great Eleusinian Games are
identical with the games celebrated
every fourth year, which are mentioned
in the decree of 329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
(Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587, lines 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note> Further, we gather from an official
Athenian inscription of 329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> that both the Great and
the Lesser Games included athletic and musical contests,
a horse-race, and a competition which bore the
name of the Ancestral or Hereditary Contest, and which
accordingly may well have formed the original kernel of
the games.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587, lines 259 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
From other Attic inscriptions we learn
that the Eleusinian games comprised a
long foot-race, a race in armour, and
a pancratium. See Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> No. 587 note 171 (vol. ii. p. 313).
The Great Eleusinian Games also included
the pentathlum (Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 678, line 2). The pancratium
included wrestling and boxing;
the pentathlum included a foot-race,
leaping, throwing the quoit, throwing
the spear, and wrestling. See W.
Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Antiquities</hi>, Third Edition, <hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> <q>Pancratium</q>
and <q>Pentathlon.</q></note> Unfortunately nothing is known about this
Ancestral Contest. We might be tempted to identify it
with the Ancestral Contest included in the Eleusinian
Festival of the Threshing-floor,<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 246, lines 46
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi>, No. 609. See above,
p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>. The identification lies all the
nearer to hand because the inscription
records a decree in honour of a man
who had sacrificed to Demeter and
Persephone at the Great Eleusinian
Games, and a provision is contained in
the decree that the honour should be proclaimed
<q>at the Ancestral Contest of the
Festival of the Threshing-floor.</q> The
same Ancestral Contest at the Festival
of the Threshing-floor is mentioned in
another Eleusinian inscription, which
records honours decreed to a man who
had sacrificed to Demeter and Persephone
at the Festival of the Threshing-floor.
See Ἐφημερὶς Ἀρχαιολογική,
1884, coll. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> which was probably held
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
on the Sacred Threshing-floor of Triptolemus at Eleusis.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</note>
If the identification could be proved, we should have
another confirmation of the tradition which connects the
games with Demeter and the corn; for according to the
prevalent tradition it was to Triptolemus that Demeter first
revealed the secret of the corn, and it was he whom she sent
out as an itinerant missionary to impart the beneficent discovery
of the cereals to all mankind and to teach them to
sow the seed.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, v. 68; Arrian,
<hi rend='italic'>Indic.</hi> 7; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Somnium</hi>, 15; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Philopseudes</hi>, 3; Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi>, vi. 22,
p. 782; Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 5.
2; Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
28, p. 53, ed. C. Lang;
Pausanias, i. 14. 2, vii. 18. 2, viii. 4.
1; Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>Eleusin.</hi> vol. i. pp. 416
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. G. Dindorf; Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>,
147, 259, 277; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 549
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Metamorph.</hi> v. 645 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 19. See
also above, p. 54. As to Triptolemus,
see L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Demeter und Persephone</hi>
(Hamburg, 1837), pp. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 769 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On monuments of art, especially in vase-paintings,
he is constantly represented along with Demeter
in this capacity, holding corn-stalks in his hand and sitting
in his car, which is sometimes winged and sometimes drawn
by dragons, and from which he is said to have sowed the
seed down on the whole world as he sped through the air.<note place='foot'>C. Strube, <hi rend='italic'>Studien über den Bilderkreis
von Eleusis</hi> (Leipsic, 1870),
pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Overbeck, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische
Kunstmythologie</hi>, iii. (Leipsic, 1873-1880),
pp. 530 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Baumeister,
<hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler des classischen Altertums</hi>,
iii. 1855 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> That Triptolemus sowed
the earth with corn from his car is
mentioned by Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>,
i. 5. 2; Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae
Compendium</hi>, 28, pp. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. C.
Lang; Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fabulae</hi>, 147; and
Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 19.</note>
At Eleusis victims bought with the first-fruits of the wheat
and barley were sacrificed to him as well as to Demeter and
Persephone.<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 20, lines 37
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner,
<hi rend='italic'>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</hi>, ii.
(Cambridge, 1905), No. 9, p. 24.</note> In short, if we may judge from the combined
testimony of Greek literature and art, Triptolemus was the
corn-hero first and foremost. Even beyond the limits of the
Greek world, all men, we are told, founded sanctuaries and
erected altars in his honour because he had bestowed on
them the gift of the corn.<note place='foot'>Arrian, <hi rend='italic'>Epicteti Dissertationes</hi>, i.
4. 30.</note> His very name has been
plausibly explained both in ancient and modern times as
<q>Thrice-ploughed</q> with reference to the Greek custom of
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
ploughing the land thrice a year,<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xviii.
483; L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Demeter und Persephone</hi>,
p. 286; F. A. Paley on Hesiod,
<hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 460. The custom
of ploughing the land thrice is alluded
to by Homer (<hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xviii. 542, <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>,
v. 127) and Hesiod (<hi rend='italic'>Theogony</hi>, 971),
and is expressly mentioned by Theophrastus
(<hi rend='italic'>Historia Plantarum</hi>, vii.
13. 6).</note> and the derivation is said to
be on philological principles free from objection.<note place='foot'>So I am informed by my learned
friend the Rev. Professor J. H.
Moulton.</note> In fact it
would seem as if Triptolemus, like Demeter and Persephone
themselves, were a purely mythical being, an embodiment
of the conception of the first sower. At all events in
the local Eleusinian legend, according to an eminent scholar,
who has paid special attention to Attic genealogy, <q>Triptolemus
does not, like his comrade Eumolpus or other founders
of Eleusinian priestly families, continue his kind, but without
leaving offspring who might perpetuate his priestly office, he
is removed from the scene of his beneficent activity. As he
appeared, so he vanishes again from the legend, after he has
fulfilled his divine mission.</q><note place='foot'>J. Toepffer, <hi rend='italic'>Attische Genealogie</hi>
(Berlin, 1889), pp. 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> However,
the Eleusinian Torchbearer Callias
apparently claimed to be descended
from Triptolemus, for in a speech addressed
to the Lacedaemonians he is
said by Xenophon (<hi rend='italic'>Hellenica</hi>, vi. 3. 6)
to have spoken of Triptolemus as
<q>our ancestor</q> (ὁ ἡμέτερος πρόγονος).
See above, p. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>. But it is possible
that Callias was here speaking, not as
a direct descendant of Triptolemus, but
merely as an Athenian, who naturally
ranked Triptolemus among the most
illustrious of the ancestral heroes of his
people. Even if he intended to claim
actual descent from the hero, this
would prove nothing as to the historical
character of Triptolemus, for
many Greek families boasted of being
descended from gods.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Prizes of
barley
given to
victors in
the Eleusinian
games.</note>
However, there is no sufficient ground for identifying the
Ancestral Contest of the Eleusinian games with the Ancestral
Contest of the Threshing-festival at Eleusis, and accordingly
the connexion of the games with the corn-harvest and with
the corn-hero Triptolemus must so far remain uncertain. But
a clear trace of such a connexion may be seen in the custom
of rewarding the victors in the Eleusinian games with
measures of barley; in the official Athenian inscription of
329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, which contains the accounts of the superintendents
of Eleusis and the Treasurers of the Two Goddesses, the
amounts of corn handed over by these officers to the priests
and priestesses for the purposes of the games is exactly
specified.<note place='foot'>The prize of barley is mentioned
by the Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi>
ix. 150. The Scholiast on Aristides
(vol. iii. pp. 55, 56, ed. G. Dindorf) mentions ears of corn as the prize without
specifying the kind of corn. In the
official Athenian inscription of 329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,
though the amount of corn distributed
in prizes both at the quadriennial and at
the biennial games is stated, we are not
told whether the corn was barley or
wheat. See Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587,
lines 259 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> According to Aristides
(<hi rend='italic'>Eleusin.</hi> vol. i. p. 417, ed. G. Dindorf,
compare p. 168) the prize consisted of
the corn which had first appeared at
Eleusis.</note> This of itself is sufficient to prove that the
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
Eleusinian games were closely connected with the worship of
Demeter and Persephone. The grain thus distributed in
prizes was probably reaped on the Rarian plain near Eleusis,
where according to the legend Triptolemus sowed the first
corn.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Marmor Parium</foreign>, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta
Historicorum Graecorum</hi>, ed. C. Müller,
i. 544. That the Rarian plain was the
first to be sown and the first to bear
crops is affirmed by Pausanias (i. 38. 6).</note> Certainly we know that the barley grown on that
plain was used in sacrifices and for the baking of the sacrificial
cakes,<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 38. 6.</note> from which we may reasonably infer that the prizes of
barley, to which no doubt a certain sanctity attached in the
popular mind, were brought from the same holy fields. So
sacred was the Rarian plain that no dead body was allowed
to defile it. When such a pollution accidentally took place,
it was expiated by the sacrifice of a pig,<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587, lines
119 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In the same inscription, a few
lines lower down, mention is made of
two pigs which were used in purifying
the sanctuary at Eleusis. On the pig
in Greek purificatory rites, see my notes
on Pausanias, ii. 31. 8 and v. 16. 8.</note> the usual victim
employed in Greek purificatory rites.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Eleusinian
games
primarily
concerned
with
Demeter
and Persephone.
The
Ancestral
Contest in
the games
may have
been
originally
a contest
between
the reapers
to finish
reaping.</note>
Thus, so far as the scanty evidence at our disposal permits
us to judge, the Eleusinian games, like the Eleusinian
Mysteries, would seem to have been primarily concerned
with Demeter and Persephone as goddesses of the corn. At
least that is expressly affirmed by the old scholiast on
Pindar and it is borne out by the practice of rewarding the
victors with measures of barley. Perhaps the Ancestral
Contest, which may well have formed the original nucleus of
the games, was a contest between the reapers on the sacred
Rarian plain to see who should finish his allotted task before
his fellows. For success in such a contest no prize could be
more appropriate than a measure of the sacred barley which
the victorious reaper had just cut on the barley-field. In
the sequel we shall see that similar contests between reapers
have been common on the harvest fields of modern Europe,
and it will appear that such competitions are not purely
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
athletic; their aim is not simply to demonstrate the superior
strength, activity, and skill of the victors; it is to secure for
the particular farm the possession of the blooming young
Corn-maiden of the present year, conceived as the embodiment
of the vigorous grain, and to pass on to laggard neighbours
the aged Corn-mother of the past year, conceived as an
embodiment of the effete and outworn energies of the corn.<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, compare <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
May it not have been so at Eleusis? may not the reapers
have vied with each other for possession of the young corn-spirit
Persephone and for avoidance of the old corn-spirit
Demeter? may not the prize of barley, which rewarded the
victor in the Ancestral Contest, have been supposed to house
in the ripe ears no less a personage than the Corn-maiden
Persephone herself? And if there is any truth in these conjectures
(for conjectures they are and nothing more), we may
hazard a guess as to the other Ancestral Contest which took
place at the Eleusinian Festival of the Threshing-floor.
Perhaps it in like manner was originally a competition between
threshers on the sacred threshing-floor of Triptolemus to determine
who should finish threshing his allotted quantity of
corn before the rest. Such competitions have also been
common, as we shall see presently, on the threshing-floors of
modern Europe, and their motive again has not been simple
emulation between sturdy swains for the reward of strength
and dexterity; it has been a dread of being burdened with
the aged and outworn spirit of the corn conceived as present
in the bundle of corn-stalks which receives the last stroke at
threshing.<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We know that effigies of Demeter with corn and
poppies in her hands stood on Greek threshing-floors.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</note>
Perhaps at the conclusion of the threshing these effigies, as
representatives of the old Corn-spirit, were passed on to
neighbours who had not yet finished threshing the corn. At
least the supposition is in harmony with modern customs
observed on the threshing-floor.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Games at
harvest
festivals in
modern
Europe.</note>
It is possible that the Eleusinian games were no more
than a popular merrymaking celebrated at the close of the
harvest. This view of their character might be supported by
modern analogies; for in some parts of Germany it has been
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
customary for the harvesters, when their work is done,
to engage in athletic competitions of various kinds, which
have at first sight no very obvious connexion with the
business of harvesting. For example, at Besbau near Luckau
great cakes were baked at the harvest-festival, and the
labourers, both men and women, ran races for them. He or
she who reached them first received not only a cake, but a
handkerchief or the like as a prize. Again, at Bergkirchen,
when the harvest was over, a garland was hung up and the
harvesters rode at it on horseback and tried to bring it down
with a stab or a blow as they galloped past. He who
succeeded in bringing it down was proclaimed King. Again,
in the villages near Fürstenwald at harvest the young men
used to fetch a fir-tree from the wood, peel the trunk, and
set it up like a mast in the middle of the village. A handkerchief
and other prizes were fastened to the top of the pole
and the men clambered up for them.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>
(Leipsic, 1848), pp. 398, 399, 400.</note> Among the peasantry
of Silesia, we are told, the harvest-home broadened out into
a popular festival, in which athletic sports figured prominently.
Thus, for example, at Järischau, in the Strehlitz district, a
scythe, a rake, a flail, and a hay-fork or pitchfork were fastened
to the top of a smooth pole and awarded as prizes, in order
of merit, to the men who displayed most agility in climbing
the pole. Younger men amused themselves with running in
sacks, high jumps, and so forth. At Prauss, near Nimptsch,
the girls ran a race in a field for aprons as prizes. In the
central parts of Silesia a favourite amusement at harvest was
a race between girls for a garland of leaves or flowers.<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Yet
it seems probable that all such sports at harvest were in
origin not mere pastimes, but that they were serious attempts
to secure in one way or another the help and blessing of the
corn-spirit. Thus in some parts of Prussia, at the close of
the rye-harvest, a few sheaves used to be left standing in the
field after all the rest of the rye had been carted home.
These sheaves were then made up into the shape of a man
and dressed out in masculine costume, and all the young
women were obliged to run a race, of which the corn-man
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
was the goal. She who won the race led off the dancing in
the evening.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), pp. 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the aim of the foot-race among the
young women is clearly to secure the corn-spirit embodied
in the last sheaf left standing on the field; for, as we shall
see later on, the last sheaf is commonly supposed to harbour
the corn-spirit and is treated accordingly like a man or a
woman.<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Date
of the
Eleusinian
games
uncertain.</note>
If the Ancestral Contest at the Eleusinian games was, as
I have conjectured, a contest between the reapers on the
sacred barley-field, we should have to suppose that the games
were celebrated at barley-harvest, which in the lowlands of
Greece falls in May or even at the end of April. This theory
is in harmony with the evidence of the scholiast on Pindar,
who tells us that the Eleusinian games were celebrated after
the corn-harvest.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> ix.
150, p. 228, ed. Aug. Boeckh.</note> No other ancient authority, so far as
I am aware, mentions at what time of the year these games
were held. Modern authorities, arguing from certain slight
and to some extent conjectural data, have variously assigned
them to Metageitnion (August) and to Boedromion
(September), and those who assign them to Boedromion
(September) are divided in opinion as to whether they
preceded or followed the Mysteries.<note place='foot'>The games are assigned to Metageitnion
by P. Stengel (Pauly-Wissowa,
<hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
v. 2. coll. 2331 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)
and to Boedromion by August Mommsen
and W. Dittenberger. The last-mentioned
scholar supposes that the games
immediately followed the Mysteries,
and August Mommsen formerly thought
so too, but he afterwards changed his
view and preferred to suppose that the
games preceded the Mysteries. See
Aug. Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi> (Leipsic,
1864), p. 263; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt
Athen im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic, 1898),
pp. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 587,
note 171 (vol. ii. pp. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). The
dating of the games in Metageitnion or
in the early part of Boedromion depends
on little more than a series of conjectures,
particularly the conjectural
restoration of an inscription and the
conjectural dating of a certain sacrifice
to Democracy.</note> However, the evidence
is far too slender and uncertain to allow of any conclusions
being based on it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Why
should
games
intended to
promote
the annual
growth of
the crops
be held
only every
second or
fourth
year? The
Eleusinian
Mysteries
probably
much older
than the
Eleusinian
games.</note>
But there is a serious difficulty in the way of connecting
the Eleusinian games with the goddesses of the corn. How
is the quadriennial or the biennial period of the games to be
reconciled with the annual growth of the crops? Year by
year the barley and the wheat are sown and reaped; how
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
then could the games, held only every fourth or every second
year, have been regarded as thank-offerings for the annual
harvest? On this view of their nature, which is the one
taken by the old scholiast on Pindar, though the harvest
was received at the hands of the Corn Goddess punctually
every year, men thanked her for her bounty only every
second year or even only every fourth year. What were
her feelings likely to be in the blank years when she
got no thanks and no games? She might naturally
resent such negligence and ingratitude and punish them
by forbidding the seed to sprout, just as she did at Eleusis
when she mourned the loss of her daughter. In short,
men could hardly expect to reap crops in years in which
they offered nothing to the Corn Goddess. That would
indeed appear to be the view generally taken by the
ancient Greeks; for we have seen that year by year
they presented the first-fruits of the barley and the
wheat to Demeter, not merely in the solemn state ritual
of Eleusis, but also in rustic festivals held by farmers
on their threshing-floors. The pious Greek husbandman
would no doubt have been shocked and horrified at a
proposal to pay the Corn Goddess her dues only every
second or fourth year. <q>No offerings, no crops,</q> he would
say to himself, and would anticipate nothing but dearth and
famine in any year when he failed to satisfy the just and
lawful demands of the divinity on whose good pleasure he
believed the growth of the corn to be directly dependent.
Accordingly we may regard it as highly probable that from
the very beginning of settled and regular agriculture in
Greece men annually propitiated the deities of the corn with
a ritual of some sort, and rendered them their dues in the
shape of offerings of the ripe barley and wheat. Now we
know that the Mysteries of Eleusis were celebrated every
year, and accordingly, if I am right in interpreting them as
essentially a dramatic representation of the annual vicissitudes
of the corn performed for the purpose of quickening
the seed, it becomes probable that in some form or another
they were annually held at Eleusis long before the practice
arose of celebrating games there every fourth or every second
year. In short, the Eleusinian mysteries were in all probability
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
far older than the Eleusinian games. How old they
were we cannot even guess. But when we consider that the
cultivation of barley and wheat, the two cereals specially
associated with Demeter, appears to have been practised in
prehistoric Europe from the Stone Age onwards,<note place='foot'>A. de Candolle, <hi rend='italic'>Origin of Cultivated
Plants</hi> (London, 1884), pp. 354
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 367 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. Munro, <hi rend='italic'>The Lake-dwellings
of Europe</hi> (London, Paris,
and Melbourne, 1890), pp. 497 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi> (Strasburg,
1901), pp. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung
und Urgeschichte</hi> (Jena, 1906-1907),
ii. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Hirt, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Indogermanen</hi> (Strasburg, 1905-1907),
i. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 273 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. 640
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; M. Much, <hi rend='italic'>Die Heimat der
Indogermanen</hi> (Jena and Berlin, 1904),
pp. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; T. E. Peet, <hi rend='italic'>The Stone
and Bronze Ages in Italy and Sicily</hi>
(Oxford, 1909), p. 362.</note> we shall
be disposed to admit that the annual performance of religious
or magical rites at Eleusis for the purpose of ensuring
good crops, whether by propitiating the Corn Goddess with
offerings of first-fruits or by dramatically representing the
sowing and the growth of the corn in mythical form, probably
dates from an extremely remote antiquity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Quadriennial
period of
many of
the great
games of
Greece. Old octennial
period
of the
Pythian
and probably
of the
Olympian
games.
The octennial
cycle
was instituted
by
the Greeks
at a very
early era
for the
purpose of
harmonising
solar
and lunar
time.</note>
But in order to clear our ideas on this subject it is
desirable to ascertain, if possible, the reason for holding the
Eleusinian games at intervals of two or four years. The
reason for holding a harvest festival and thanksgiving every
year is obvious enough; but why hold games only every
second or every fourth year? The reason for such limitations
is by no means obvious on the face of them, especially
if the growth of the crops is deemed dependent on the
celebration. In order to find an answer to this question it
may be well at the outset to confine our attention to the
Great Eleusinian Games, which were celebrated only every
fourth year. That these were the principal games appears
not only from their name, but from the testimony of Aristotle,
or at least of the author of <hi rend='italic'>The Constitution of Athens</hi>,
who notices only the quadriennial or, as in accordance with
Greek idiom he calls it, the penteteric celebration of the
games.<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Constitution of Athens</hi>,
54, where the quadriennial (penteteric)
festival of the Eleusinian Games is
mentioned along with the quadriennial
festivals of the Panathenaica, the Delia,
the Brauronia, and the Heraclea. The
biennial (trieteric) festival of the Eleusinian
Games is mentioned only in the
inscription of 329 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> (Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No.
587, lines 259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). As to the identity
of the Great Eleusinian Games
with the quadriennial games see Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,
No. 246 note 9, No. 587 note 171.</note> Now the custom of holding games at intervals of
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
four years was very common in Greece; to take only a few
conspicuous examples the Olympic games at Olympia, the
Pythian games at Delphi, the Panathenaic games at Athens,
and the Eleutherian games at Plataea<note place='foot'>As to the Plataean games see
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Aristides</hi>, 21; Pausanias,
ix. 2. 6.</note> were all celebrated
at quadriennial or, as the Greeks called them, penteteric
periods; and at a later time when Augustus instituted, or
rather renewed on a more splendid scale, the games at
Actium to commemorate his great victory, he followed a well-established
Greek precedent by ordaining that they should
be quadriennial.<note place='foot'>Strabo, vii. 7. 6, p. 325; Suetonius,
<hi rend='italic'>Augustus</hi>, 18; Dio Cassius, li.
1; Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
des Antiquités Grecques et Romaines</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Actia.</q></note> Still later the emperor Hadrian instituted
quadriennial games at Mantinea in honour of his dead
favourite Antinous.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 9. 8.</note> But in regard to the two greatest of
all the Greek games, the Olympian and the Pythian, I have
shewn reasons for thinking that they were originally celebrated
at intervals of eight instead of four years; certainly
this is attested for the Pythian games,<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Pyth.</hi>, Argument,
p. 298, ed. Aug. Boeckh;
Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 6.
According to the scholiast on Pindar
(<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>) the change from the octennial to
the quadriennial period was occasioned
by the nymphs of Parnassus bringing
ripe fruits in their hands to Apollo,
after he had slain the dragon at Delphi.</note> and the mode of
calculating the Olympiads by alternate periods of fifty and
forty-nine lunar months,<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> iii. 35
(20), p. 98, ed. Aug. Boeckh. Compare
Boeckh's commentary on Pindar (vol.
iii. p. 138 of his edition); L. Ideler,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen und
technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii.
605 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> which added together make up
eight solar years, seems to prove that the Olympic cycle of
four years was really based on a cycle of eight years, from
which it is natural to infer that in the beginning the
Olympic, like the Pythian, games may have been octennial
instead of quadriennial.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, chapter ii.
§ 4, <q>Octennial Tenure of the Kingship,</q>
especially pp. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 80, 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now we know from the testimony
of the ancients themselves that the Greeks instituted the
eight-years' cycle for the purpose of harmonising solar and
lunar time.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
viii. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ed. C.
Manitius (Leipsic, 1898); Censorinus,
<hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 2-6.</note> They regulated their calendar primarily by observation
of the moon rather than of the sun; their months
were lunar, and their ordinary year consisted of twelve lunar
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
months. But the solar year of three hundred and sixty-five
and a quarter days exceeds the lunar year of twelve lunar
months or three hundred and fifty-four days by eleven and a
quarter days, so that in eight solar years the excess amounts
to ninety days or roughly three lunar months. Accordingly
the Greeks equated eight solar years to eight lunar
years of twelve months each by intercalating three lunar
months of thirty days each in the octennial cycle; they
intercalated one lunar month in the third year of the cycle,
a second lunar month in the fifth year, and a third lunar
month in the eighth year.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In this way they, so to say,
made the sun and moon keep time together by reckoning
ninety-nine lunar months as equivalent to eight solar
years; so that if, for example, the full moon coincided with
the summer solstice in one year, it coincided with it again
after the revolution of the eight years' cycle, but not before.
The equation was indeed not quite exact, and in order to
render it so the Greeks afterwards found themselves obliged,
first, to intercalate three days every sixteen years, and, next,
to omit one intercalary month in every period of one hundred
and sixty years.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
viii. 36-41.</note> But these corrections were doubtless refinements
of a later age; they may have been due to the
astronomer Eudoxus of Cnidus, or to Cleostratus of Tenedos,
who were variously, but incorrectly, supposed to have instituted
the octennial cycle.<note place='foot'>Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 5.
As Eudoxus flourished in the fourth
century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, some sixty or seventy
years after Meton, who introduced the
nineteen years' cycle to remedy the
defects of the octennial cycle, the
claim of Eudoxus to have instituted
the latter cycle may at once be put out
of court. The claim of Cleostratus,
who seems to have lived in the sixth
or fifth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, cannot be dismissed
so summarily; but for the
reasons given in the text he can hardly
have done more than suggest corrections
or improvements of the ancient
octennial cycle.</note> There are strong grounds for
holding that in its simplest form the octennial cycle of
ninety-nine lunar months dates from an extremely remote
antiquity in Greece; that it was in fact, as a well-informed
Greek writer tell us,<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
viii. 27. With far less probability
Censorinus (<hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 2-4)
supposes that the octennial cycle was
produced by the successive duplication
of biennial and quadriennial cycles.
See below, pp. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> the first systematic attempt to bring
solar and the lunar time into harmony. Indeed, if the
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
Olympiads were calculated, as they appear to have been, on
the eight years' cycle, this of itself suffices to place the origin
of the cycle not later than 776 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, the year with which
the reckoning by Olympiads begins. And when we bear in
mind the very remote period from which, judged by the
wonderful remains of Mycenae, Tiryns, Cnossus and other
cities, civilisation in Greek lands appears to date, it seems
reasonable to suppose that the octennial cycle, based as it
was on very simple observations, for which nothing but good
eyes and almost no astronomical knowledge was necessary,<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
ii. 605.</note>
may have been handed down among the inhabitants of these
countries from ages that preceded by many centuries, possibly
by thousands of years, the great period of Greek literature
and art. The supposition is confirmed by the traces which
the octennial cycle has left of itself in certain ancient
Greek customs and superstitions, particularly by the evidence
which points to the conclusion that at two of the
oldest seats of monarchy in Greece, namely Cnossus and
Sparta, the king's tenure of office was formerly limited to
eight years.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Speaking of the octennial cycle Censorinus
observes that <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ob hoc in
Graecia multae religiones hoc intervallo
temporis summa caerimonia coluntur</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 6). Compare
L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 605 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. F.
Unger, <q>Zeitrechnung der Griechen
und Römer,</q> in Iwan Müller's <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 732 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The great age and
the wide diffusion of the octennial
cycle in Greece are rightly maintained
by A. Schmidt (<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der griechischen
Chronologie</hi>, Jena, 1888, pp. 61
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), who suggests that the cycle may
have owed something to the astronomy
of the Egyptians, with whom the inhabitants
of Greece are known to
have had relations from a very early
time.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The motive
for instituting
the
eight years'
cycle was
religious,
not practical
or
scientific.</note>
We are informed, and may readily believe, that the
motive which led the Greeks to adopt the eight years' cycle
was religious rather than practical or scientific: their aim
was not so much to ensure the punctual despatch of business
or to solve an abstract problem in astronomy, as to ascertain
the exact days on which they ought to sacrifice to the gods.
For the Greeks regularly employed lunar months in their
reckonings,<note place='foot'>Aratus, <hi rend='italic'>Phaenomena</hi>, 733 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>, i.
255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and accordingly if they had dated their religious
festivals simply by the number of the month and the day of
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
the month, the excess of eleven and a quarter days of the
solar over the lunar year would have had the effect of causing
the festivals gradually to revolve throughout the whole
circle of the seasons, so that in time ceremonies which
properly belonged to winter would come to be held in
summer, and on the contrary ceremonies which were only
appropriate to summer would come to be held in winter.
To avoid this anomaly, and to ensure that festivals dated by
lunar months should fall at fixed or nearly fixed points in
the solar year, the Greeks adopted the octennial cycle by
the simple expedient of intercalating three lunar months in
every period of eight years. In doing so they acted, as one
of their writers justly pointed out, on a principle precisely
the reverse of that followed by the ancient Egyptians, who
deliberately regulated their religious festivals by a purely
lunar calendar for the purpose of allowing them gradually to
revolve throughout the whole circle of the seasons.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>, viii. 15-45.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In early
times the
regulation
of the
calendar is
largely an
affair of
religion.</note>
Thus at an early stage of culture the regulation of the
calendar is largely an affair of religion: it is a means of
maintaining the established relations between gods and men
on a satisfactory footing; and in public opinion the great
evil of a disordered calendar is not so much that it disturbs
and disarranges the ordinary course of business and the
various transactions of civil life, as that it endangers the
welfare or even the existence both of individuals and of
the community by interrupting their normal intercourse with
those divine powers on whose favour men believe themselves
to be absolutely dependent. Hence in states which take
this view of the deep religious import of the calendar its
superintendence is naturally entrusted to priests rather than
to astronomers, because the science of astronomy is regarded
merely as ancillary to the deeper mysteries of theology.
For example, at Rome the method of determining the
months and regulating the festivals was a secret which the
pontiffs for ages jealously guarded from the profane vulgar;
and in consequence of their ignorance and incapacity the
calendar fell into confusion and the festivals were celebrated
out of their natural seasons, until the greatest of all the
Roman pontiffs, Julius Caesar, remedied the confusion and
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
placed the calendar of the civilised world on the firm foundation
on which, with little change, it stands to this day.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, i. 15. 9
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Livy, ix. 46. 5; Valerius Maximus,
ii. 5. 2; Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>Pro Muraena</hi>,
xi. 25; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De legibus</hi>, ii. 12. 29;
Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Divus Iulius</hi>, 40; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Caesar</hi>, 59.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The quadriennial
period of
games and
festivals in
Greece was
probably
arrived at
by bisecting
an
older
octennial
period.</note>
On the whole, then, it appears probable that the octennial
cycle, based on considerations of religion and on elementary
observations of the two great luminaries, dated from a very
remote period among the ancient Greeks; if they did not
bring it with them when they migrated southwards from the
oakwoods and beechwoods of Central Europe, they may
well have taken it over from their civilised predecessors of
different blood and different language whom they found
leading a settled agricultural life on the lands about the
Aegean Sea. Now we have seen reasons to hold that the
two most famous of the great Greek games, the Pythian and
the Olympian, were both based on the ancient cycle of
eight years, and that the quadriennial period at which they
were regularly celebrated in historical times was arrived at
by a subdivision of the older octennial cycle. It is hardly
rash, therefore, to conjecture that the quadriennial period in
general, regarded as the normal period for the celebration of
great games and festivals, was originally founded on elementary
religious and astronomical considerations of the same
kind, that is, on a somewhat crude attempt to harmonise
the discrepancies of solar and lunar time and thereby to
ensure the continued favour of the gods. It is, indeed,
certain or probable that some of these quadriennial festivals
were celebrated in honour of the dead;<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 92
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> but there seems to
be nothing in the beliefs or customs of the ancient Greeks
concerning the dead which would suggest a quadriennial
period as an appropriate one for propitiating the ghosts of
the departed. At first sight it is different with the octennial
period; for according to Pindar, the souls of the dead who
had been purged of their guilt by an abode of eight years
in the nether world were born again on earth in the ninth
year as glorious kings, athletes, and sages.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Meno</hi>, p. 81 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a-c</hi>; Pindar,
ed. Aug. Boeckh, vol. iii. pp. 623 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
Frag. 98. See further <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>,
pp. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now if this
belief in the reincarnation of the dead after eight years were
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
primitive, it might certainly furnish an excellent reason for
honouring the ghosts of great men at their graves every
eight years in order to facilitate their rebirth into the world.
Yet the period of eight years thus rigidly applied to the life
of disembodied spirits appears too arbitrary and conventional
to be really primitive, and we may suspect that in this
application it was nothing but an inference drawn from the
old octennial cycle, which had been instituted for the purpose
of reconciling solar and lunar time. If that was so, it will
follow that the quadriennial period of funeral games was,
like the similar period of other religious festivals, obtained
through the bisection of the octennial cycle, and hence that
it was ultimately derived from astronomical considerations
rather than from any beliefs touching a quadriennial revolution
in the state of the dead. Yet in historical times it may
well have happened that these considerations were forgotten,
and that games and festivals were instituted at quadriennial
intervals, for example at Plataea<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Aristides</hi>, 21; Pausanias, ix. 2. 6.</note> in honour of the slain,
at Actium to commemorate the great victory, and at
Mantinea in honour of Antinous,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>.</note> without any conscious
reference to the sun and moon, and merely because that
period had from time immemorial been regarded as the
proper and normal one for the celebration of certain solemn
religious rites.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
reasons for
bisecting
the old
octennial
period into
two quadriennial
periods
may have
been partly
religious,
partly
political.</note>
If we enquire why the Greeks so often bisected the old
octennial period into two quadriennial periods for purposes
of religion, the answer can only be conjectural, for no
positive information appears to be given us on the subject
by ancient writers. Perhaps they thought that eight years
was too long a time to elapse between the solemn services,
and that it was desirable to propitiate the deities at shorter
intervals. But it is possible that political as well as
religious motives may have operated to produce the change.
We have seen reason to think that at two of the oldest seats
of monarchy in Greece, namely Cnossus and Sparta, kings
formerly held office for periods of eight years only, after
which their sovereignty either terminated or had to be formally
renewed. Now with the gradual growth of that democratic
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
sentiment, which ultimately dominated Greek political life,
men would become more and more jealous of the kingly power
and would seek to restrict it within narrower limits, and one
of the most obvious means of doing so was to shorten the
king's tenure of office. We know that this was done at
Athens, where the dynasty of the Medontids was reduced
from the rank of monarchs for life to that of magistrates
holding office for ten years only.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, iv. 5. 10; compare
Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Constitution of Athens</hi>, iii.
1; G. Gilbert, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der
griechischen Staatsalterthumer</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Leipsic, 1893) pp. 122 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is possible that elsewhere
the king's reign was cut down from eight years to
four years; and if I am right in my explanation of the
origin of the Olympic games this political revolution actually
took place at Olympia, where the victors in the chariot-race
would seem at first to have personated the Sun-god
and perhaps held office in the capacity of divine kings
during the intervals between successive celebrations of the
games.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 89-92.</note> If at Olympia and elsewhere the games were of
old primarily contests in which the king had personally to
take part for the purpose of attesting his bodily vigour and
therefore his capacity for office, the repetition of the test at
intervals of four instead of eight years might be regarded
as furnishing a better guarantee of the maintenance of the
king's efficiency and thereby of the general welfare, which
in primitive society is often supposed to be sympathetically
bound up with the health and strength of the king.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The biennial
period
of some
Greek
games may
have been
obtained
by bisecting
the
quadriennial
period.</note>
But while many of the great Greek games were celebrated
at intervals of four years, others, such as the Nemean and the
Isthmian, were celebrated at intervals of two years only; and
just as the quadriennial period seems to have been arrived at
through a bisection of the octennial period, so we may surmise
that the biennial period was produced by a bisection of the
quadriennial period. This was the view which the admirable
modern chronologer L. Ideler took of the origin of the quadriennial
and biennial festivals respectively,<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
ii. 606 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and it appears far
more probable than the contrary opinion of the ancient chronologer
Censorinus, that the quadriennial period was reached by
doubling the biennial, and the octennial period by doubling
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
the quadriennial.<note place='foot'>Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii.
2-4.</note> The theory of Censorinus was that the
Greeks started with a biennial cycle of twelve and thirteen
lunar months alternately in successive years for the purpose
of harmonising solar and lunar time.<note place='foot'>Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 2.</note> But as the cycle so
produced exceeds the true solar time by seven and a half
days,<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. 270.</note> the discrepancy which it leaves between the two
great celestial clocks, the sun and moon, was too glaring to
escape the observation even of simple farmers, who would
soon have been painfully sensible that the times were out of
joint, if they had attempted to regulate the various operations
of the agricultural year by reference to so very inaccurate an
almanac. It is unlikely, therefore, that the Greeks ever
made much use of a biennial cycle of this sort.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Application
of the
foregoing
conclusion
to the
Eleusinian
games.</note>
Now to apply these conclusions to the Eleusinian games,
which furnished the starting-point for the preceding discussion.
Whatever the origin and meaning of these games
may have been, we may surmise that the quadriennial and
biennial periods at which they were held were originally
derived from astronomical considerations, and that they had
nothing to do directly either with the agricultural cycle,
which is annual, nor with the worship of the dead, which can
scarcely be said to have any cycle at all, unless indeed it be
an annual one. In other words, neither the needs of
husbandry nor the superstitions relating to ghosts furnish
any natural explanation of the quadriennial and biennial
periods of the Eleusinian games, and to discover such an
explanation we are obliged to fall back on astronomy or, to
be more exact, on that blend of astronomy with religion
which appears to be mainly responsible for such Greek
festivals as exceed a year in their period. To admit this is
not to decide the question whether the Eleusinian games
were agricultural or funereal in character; but it is implicitly
to acknowledge that the games were of later origin
than the annual ceremonies, including the Great Mysteries,
which were designed to propitiate the deities of the corn
for the very simple and practical purpose of ensuring good
crops within the year. For it cannot but be that men
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
observed and laid their account with the annual changes of
the seasons, especially as manifested by the growth and
maturity of the crops, long before they attempted to reconcile
the discrepancies of solar and lunar time by a series of
observations extending over several years.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Varro on
the rites of
Eleusis.</note>
On the whole, then, if, ignoring theories, we adhere to
the evidence of the ancients themselves in regard to the
rites of Eleusis, including under that general term the
Great Mysteries, the games, the Festival before Ploughing
(<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>proerosia</foreign>), the Festival of the Threshing-floor, the Green
Festival, the Festival of the Cornstalks, and the offerings
of first-fruits, we shall probably incline to agree with the
most learned of ancient antiquaries, the Roman Varro,
who, to quote Augustine's report of his opinion, <q>interpreted
the whole of the Eleusinian mysteries as relating
to the corn which Ceres (Demeter) had discovered, and
to Proserpine (Persephone), whom Pluto had carried off
from her. And Proserpine herself, he said, signifies the
fecundity of the seeds, the failure of which at a certain time
had caused the earth to mourn for barrenness, and therefore
had given rise to the opinion that the daughter of Ceres, that
is, fecundity itself, had been ravished by Pluto and detained
in the nether world; and when the dearth had been
publicly mourned and fecundity had returned once more,
there was gladness at the return of Proserpine and solemn
rites were instituted accordingly. After that he says,</q>
continues Augustine, reporting Varro, <q>that many things
were taught in her mysteries which had no reference but to
the discovery of the corn.</q><note place='foot'>Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, vii. 20.
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In Cereris autem sacris praedicantur
illa Eleusinia, quae apud
Athenienses nobilissima fuerunt. De
quibus iste [Varro] nihil interpretatur,
nisi quod attinet ad frumentum, quod
Ceres invenit, et ad Proserpinam,
quam rapiente Orco perdidit. Et hanc
ipsam dicit significare foecunditatem
seminum.... Dicit deinde multa in
mysteriis ejus tradi, quae nisi ad
frugum inventionem non pertineant.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The close
resemblance
between
the artistic
types of
Demeter
and Persephone
militates
against the
theory that
the two
goddesses
personified
two things
so different
as the
earth and
the corn.</note>
Thus far I have for the most part assumed an identity
of nature between Demeter and Persephone, the divine
mother and daughter personifying the corn in its double
aspect of the seed-corn of last year and the ripe ears of
this, and I pointed out that this view of the substantial
unity of mother and daughter is borne out by their portraits
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
in Greek art, which are often so alike as to be indistinguishable.
Such a close resemblance between the artistic types
of Demeter and Persephone militates decidedly against the
view that the two goddesses are mythical embodiments of
two things so different and so easily distinguishable from
each other as the earth and the vegetation which springs
from it. Had Greek artists accepted that view of Demeter
and Persephone, they could surely have devised types of
them which would have brought out the deep distinction
between the goddesses. That they were capable of doing
so is proved by the simple fact that they regularly represented
the Earth Goddess by a type which differed widely
both from that of Demeter and from that of Persephone.<note place='foot'>A. Baumeister, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler des
classischen Altertums</hi>, i. 577 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> "Gaia," in W. H.
Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und röm.
Mythologie</hi>, i. 1574 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; L. R. Farnell,
<hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>,
iii. (Oxford, 1907) p. 27.</note>
Not only so, but they sometimes set the two types of the
Earth Goddess and the Corn Goddess (Demeter) side by
side as if on purpose to demonstrate their difference. Thus
at Patrae there was a sanctuary of Demeter, in which she
and Persephone were portrayed standing, while Earth was
represented by a seated image;<note place='foot'>Pausanias, vii. 21. 11. At
Athens there was a sanctuary of Earth
the Nursing-Mother and of Green
Demeter (Pausanias, i. 22. 3), but we
do not know how the goddesses were
represented.</note> and on a vase-painting
the Earth Goddess is seen appropriately emerging from
the ground with a horn of plenty and an infant in her
uplifted arms, while Demeter and Persephone, scarcely distinguishable
from each other, stand at full height behind her,
looking down at her half-buried figure, and Triptolemus in
his wheeled car sits directly above her.<note place='foot'>L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the
Greek States</hi>, iii. 256 with plate xxi. b.</note> In this instructive
picture, accordingly, we see grouped together the principal
personages in the myth of the corn: the Earth Goddess, the
two Goddesses of the old and the new corn, and the hero
who is said to have been sent forth by the Corn Goddess
to sow the seed broadcast over the earth. Such representations
seem to prove that the artists clearly distinguished
Demeter from the Earth Goddess.<note place='foot'><p>The distinction between Demeter
(Ceres) and the Earth Goddess is clearly
marked by Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 673 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:
</p>
<p>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Officium commune Ceres et Terra tuentur;<lb/>
Haec praebet causam frugibus, illa locum.</foreign></q>
</p></note> And if Demeter did
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
not personify the earth, can there be any reasonable doubt
that, like her daughter, she personified the corn which was
so commonly called by her name from the time of Homer
downwards? The essential identity of mother and daughter
is suggested, not only by the close resemblance of their
artistic types, but also by the official title of <q>the Two
Goddesses</q> which was regularly applied to them in the great
sanctuary at Eleusis without any specification of their individual
attributes and titles,<note place='foot'>Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Nos. 20, 408,
411, 587, 646, 647, 652, 720, 789.
Compare the expression διώνυμοι θέαι
applied to them by Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi>,
683, with the Scholiast's note.</note> as if their separate individualities
had almost merged in a single divine substance.<note place='foot'>The substantial identity of
Demeter and Persephone has been
recognised by some modern scholars,
though their interpretations of the
myth do not altogether agree with the
one adopted in the text. See F.
G. Welcker, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Götterlehre</hi>
(Göttingen, 1857-1862), ii. 532; L.
Preller, in Pauly's <hi rend='italic'>Realencyclopädie der
classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>, vi.
106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. Lenormant, in Daremberg
et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités
Grecques et Romaines</hi>, i. 2. pp. 1047
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>As goddesses
of
the corn
Demeter
and Persephone
came to be
associated
with the
ideas of
death and
resurrection.</note>
Surveying the evidence as a whole, we may say that
from the myth of Demeter and Persephone, from their ritual,
from their representations in art, from the titles which they
bore, from the offerings of first-fruits which were presented
to them, and from the names applied to the cereals, we are
fairly entitled to conclude that in the mind of the ordinary
Greek the two goddesses were essentially personifications of
the corn, and that in this germ the whole efflorescence of
their religion finds implicitly its explanation. But to maintain
this is not to deny that in the long course of religious
evolution high moral and spiritual conceptions were grafted
on this simple original stock and blossomed out into fairer
flowers than the bloom of the barley and the wheat.
Above all, the thought of the seed buried in the earth in
order to spring up to new and higher life readily suggested
a comparison with human destiny, and strengthened the
hope that for man too the grave may be but the beginning of
a better and happier existence in some brighter world unknown.
This simple and natural reflection seems perfectly sufficient
to explain the association of the Corn Goddess at Eleusis
with the mystery of death and the hope of a blissful
immortality. For that the ancients regarded initiation in
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
the Eleusinian mysteries as a key to unlock the gates of
Paradise appears to be proved by the allusions which well-informed
writers among them drop to the happiness in store
for the initiated hereafter.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Homeric Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 480
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pindar, quoted by Clement of
Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> iii. 3. 17, p. 518, ed.
Potter; Sophocles, quoted by Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>De audiendis poetis</hi>, 4; Isocrates,
<hi rend='italic'>Panegyricus</hi>, 6; Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De legibus</hi>,
ii. 14. 36; Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>Eleusin.</hi> vol. i.
p. 421, ed. G. Dindorf.</note> No doubt it is easy for us to
discern the flimsiness of the logical foundation on which such
high hopes were built.<note place='foot'>A learned German professor has
thought it worth while to break the
poor butterfly argument on the wheel
of his inflexible logic. The cruel act,
while it proves the hardness of the
professor's head, says little for his
knowledge of human nature, which
does not always act in strict accordance
with the impulse of the syllogistic
machinery. See Erwin Rohde,
<hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903),
i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But drowning men clutch at straws,
and we need not wonder that the Greeks, like ourselves,
with death before them and a great love of life in their
hearts, should not have stopped to weigh with too nice a
hand the arguments that told for and against the prospect
of human immortality. The reasoning that satisfied Saint
Paul<note place='foot'>1 Corinthians xv. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and has brought comfort to untold thousands of
sorrowing Christians, standing by the deathbed or the
open grave of their loved ones, was good enough to pass
muster with ancient pagans, when they too bowed their
heads under the burden of grief, and, with the taper of
life burning low in the socket, looked forward into the
darkness of the unknown. Therefore we do no indignity
to the myth of Demeter and Persephone&mdash;one of the few
myths in which the sunshine and clarity of the Greek
genius are crossed by the shadow and mystery of death&mdash;when
we trace its origin to some of the most familiar, yet
eternally affecting aspects of nature, to the melancholy
gloom and decay of autumn and to the freshness, the brightness,
and the verdure of spring.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Magical Significance of Games in Primitive
Agriculture.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Games
played as
magical
ceremonies
to promote
the growth
of the
crops.
The
Kayans
of central
Borneo, a
primitive
agricultural
people. The sacred
rice-fields
(<foreign rend='italic'>luma lali</foreign>)
on which
all religious
ceremonies
requisite
for agriculture
are
performed.</note>
In the preceding chapter we saw that among the rites
of Eleusis were comprised certain athletic sports, such as
foot-races, horse-races, leaping, wrestling, and boxing, the
victors in which were rewarded with measures of barley
distributed among them by the priests.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, with the footnote 5.</note> These sports the
ancients themselves associated with the worship of Demeter
and Persephone, the goddesses of the corn, and strange as
such an association may seem to us, it is not without its
analogy among the harvest customs of modern European
peasantry.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But to discover clear cases of games practised for
the express purpose of promoting the growth of the crops, we
must turn to more primitive agricultural communities than
the Athenians of classical antiquity or the peoples of modern
Europe. Such communities may be found at the present
day among the savage tribes of Borneo and New Guinea,
who subsist mainly by tilling the ground. Among them we
take the Kayans or Bahaus of central Borneo as typical.
They are essentially an agricultural people, and devote themselves
mainly to the cultivation of rice, which furnishes their
staple food; all other products of the ground are of subordinate
importance. Hence agriculture, we are told,
dominates the whole life of these tribes: their year is the
year of the cultivation of the rice, and they divide it into
various periods which are determined by the conditions
necessary for the tilling of the fields and the manipulation
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
of the rice. <q>In tribes whose thoughts are so much engrossed
by agriculture it is no wonder that they associate
with it their ideas of the powers which rule them for good
or evil. The spirit-world stands in close connexion with
the agriculture of the Bahaus; without the consent of the
spirits no work in the fields may be undertaken. Moreover,
all the great popular festivals coincide with the different
periods of the cultivation of the rice. As the people are in
an unusual state of affluence after harvest, all family festivals
which require a large outlay are for practical reasons deferred
till the New Year festival at the end of harvest. The two
mighty spirits Amei Awi and his wife Buring Une, who,
according to the belief of the Kayans, live in a world under
ground, dominate the whole of the tillage and determine
the issue of the harvest in great measure by the behaviour
of the owner of the land, not so much by his moral conduct,
as by the offerings he has made to the spirits and the attention
he has paid to their warnings. An important part in
agriculture falls to the chief: at the festivals he has, in the
name of the whole tribe, to see to it that the prescribed conjurations
are carried out by the priestesses. All religious
ceremonies required for the cultivation of the ground take
place in a small rice-field specially set apart for that purpose,
called <foreign rend='italic'>luma lali</foreign>: here the chief's family ushers in
every fresh operation in the cultivation of the rice, such as
sowing, hoeing, and reaping: the solemn actions there performed
have a symbolical significance.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
at the
sowing
festival. Taboos
observed
at the
sowing
festival.</note>
Not only the chief's family among the Kayans has such
a consecrated field; every family possesses one of its own.
These little fields are never cultivated for the sake of their
produce: they serve only as the scene of religious ceremonies
and of those symbolical operations of agriculture which are
afterwards performed in earnest on the real rice-fields.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 164.</note>
For example, at the festival before sowing a priestess sows
some rice on the consecrated field of the chief's family and
then calls on a number of young men and girls to complete
the work; the young men then dig holes in the ground
with digging-sticks, and the girls come behind them and
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
plant the rice-seed in the holes. Afterwards the priestesses
lay offerings of food, wrapt in banana-leaves, here and there
on the holy field, while they croon prayers to the spirits in
soft tones, which are half drowned in the clashing music of
the gongs. On another day women gather all kinds of edible
leaves in their gardens and fields, boil them in water, and
then sprinkle the water on the consecrated rice-field. But
on that and other days of the festival the people attend also
to their own wants, banqueting on a favourite species of rice
and other dainties. The ceremonies connected with sowing
last several weeks, and during this time certain taboos have
to be observed by the people. Thus on the first day of the
festival the whole population, except the very old and the
very young, must refrain from bathing; after that there
follows a period of rest for eight nights, during which the
people may neither work nor hold intercourse with their
neighbours. On the tenth day the prohibition to bathe is
again enforced; and during the eight following days the
great rice-field of the village, where the real crops are raised,
is sowed.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 164-167.</note> The reason for excluding strangers from the
village at these times is a religious one. It is a fear lest
the presence of strangers might frighten the spirits or put
them in a bad humour, and so defeat the object of the
ceremony; for, while the religious ceremonies which accompany
the cultivation of the rice differ somewhat from each
other in different tribes, the ideas at the bottom of them,
we are told, are everywhere the same: the aim always is to
appease and propitiate the souls of the rice and the other
spirits by sacrifices of all sorts.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
163. The motive assigned for the exclusion
of strangers at the sowing festival
applies equally to all religious rites.
<q>In all religious observances,</q> says
Dr. Nieuwenhuis, <q>the Kayans fear
the presence of strangers, because these
latter might frighten and annoy the
spirits which are invoked.</q> On the
periods of seclusion and quiet observed
in connexion with agriculture by the
Kayans of Sarawak, see W. H. Furness,
<hi rend='italic'>Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</hi>
(Philadelphia, 1902), pp. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Games
played at
the sowing
festival. Masquerade
at the
sowing
festival.</note>
However, during this obligatory period of seclusion and
rest the Kayans employ themselves in various pursuits,
which, though at first sight they might seem to serve no
other purpose than that of recreation, have really in the
minds of the people a much deeper significance. For
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
example, at this time the men often play at spinning
tops. The tops are smooth, flat pieces of wood weighing
several pounds. Each man tries to spin his own top so that
it knocks down those of his neighbours and continues itself
to revolve triumphantly. New tops are commonly carved
for the festival. The older men sometimes use heavy tops
of iron-wood. Again, every evening the young men assemble
in the open space before the chief's house and engage in
contests of strength and agility, while the women watch
them from the long gallery or verandah of the house.
Another popular pastime during the festival of sowing is a
masquerade. It takes place on the evening of the tenth day,
the day on which, for the second time, the people are forbidden
to bathe. The scene of the performance is again
the open space in front of the chief's house. As the day
draws towards evening, the villagers begin to assemble in the
gallery or verandah of the house in order to secure good
places for viewing the masquerade. All the maskers at
these ceremonies represent evil spirits. The men wear
ugly wooden masks on their faces, and their bodies are
swathed in masses of slit banana leaves so as to imitate
the hideous faces and hairy bodies of the demons. The
young women wear on their heads cylindrical baskets, which
conceal their real features, while they exhibit to the spectators
grotesque human faces formed by stitches on pieces of white
cotton, which are fastened to the baskets. On the occasion
when Dr. Nieuwenhuis witnessed the ceremony, the first to
appear on the scene were some men wearing wooden masks
and helmets and so thickly wrapt in banana leaves that they
looked like moving masses of green foliage. They danced
silently, keeping time to the beat of the gongs. They were
followed by other figures, some of whom executed war-dances;
but the weight of their leafy envelope was such
that they soon grew tired, and though they leaped high,
they uttered none of the wild war-whoops which usually
accompany these martial exercises. When darkness fell,
the dances ceased and were replaced by a little drama
representing a boar brought to bay by a pack of hounds.
The part of the boar was played by an actor wearing a
wooden boar's head mask, who ran about on all fours and
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
grunted in a life-like manner, while the hounds, acted by
young men, snarled, yelped, and made dashes at him. The
play was watched with lively interest and peals of laughter
by the spectators. Later in the evening eight disguised
girls danced, one behind the other, with slow steps and
waving arms, to the glimmering light of torches and the
strains of a sort of jew's harp.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
167-169.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rites at
hoeing.</note>
The rites which accompany the sowing of the fields are
no sooner over than those which usher in the hoeing begin.
Like the sowing ceremonies, they are inaugurated by a
priestess, who hoes the sacred field round about a sacrificial
stage and then calls upon other people to complete the
work. After that the holy field is again sprinkled with a
decoction of herbs.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
169.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Kayan
New Year
festival.
Offerings
and addresses
to
the spirits. Sacrifice
of pigs.</note>
But the crowning point of the Kayan year is the New Year
festival. The harvest has then been fully housed: abundance
reigns in every family, and for eight days the people, dressed
out in all their finery, give themselves up to mirth and jollity.
The festival was witnessed by the Dutch explorer Dr.
Nieuwenhuis. To lure the good spirits from the spirit land
baskets filled with precious objects were set out before the
windows, and the priestesses made long speeches, in which
they invited these beneficent beings to come to the chief's
house and to stay there during the whole of the ceremonies.
Two days afterwards one of the priestesses harangued the
spirits for three-quarters of an hour, telling them who the
Kayans were, from whom the chief's family was descended,
what the tribe was doing, and what were its wishes, not forgetting
to implore the vengeance of the spirits on the Batang-Lupars,
the hereditary foes of the Kayans. The harangue was
couched in rhyming verse and delivered in sing-song tones.
Five days later eight priestesses ascended a sacrificial stage,
on which food was daily set forth for the spirits. There
they joined hands and crooned another long address to the
spirits, marking the time with their hands. Then a basket
containing offerings of food was handed up to them, and one
of the priestesses opened it and invited the spirits to enter the
basket. When they were supposed to have done so, the lid
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
was shut down on them, and the basket with the spirits in
it was conveyed into the chief's house. As the priestesses
in the performance of the sacred ceremonies might not touch
the ground, planks were cut from a fruit-tree and laid on the
ground for them to step on. But the great feature of the
New Year festival is the sacrifice of pigs, of which the
spiritual essence is appropriately offered to the spirits, while
their material substance is consumed by the worshippers.
In carrying out this highly satisfactory arrangement, while
the live pigs lay tethered in a row on the ground, the
priestesses danced solemnly round a sacrificial stage, each of
them arrayed in a war-mantle of panther-skin and wearing a
war-cap on her head, and on either side two priests armed
with swords executed war dances for the purpose of scaring
away evil spirits. By their gesticulations the priestesses
indicated to the powers above that the pigs were intended
for their benefit. One of them, a fat but dignified lady,
dancing composedly, seemed by her courteous gestures to
invite the souls of the pigs to ascend up to heaven; but
others, not content with this too ideal offering, rushed at the
pigs, seized the smallest of them by the hind legs, and
exerting all their strength danced with the squealing porker
to and from the sacrificial stage. In the evening, before
darkness fell, the animals were slaughtered and their livers
examined for omens: if the under side of the liver was
pale, the omen was good; but if it was dark, the omen
was evil. On the last day of the festival one of the chief
priestesses, in martial array, danced round the sacrificial
stage, making passes with her old sword as if she would
heave the whole structure heavenward; while others stabbed
with spears at the foul fiends that might be hovering in
the air, intent on disturbing the sacred ministers at their
holy work.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi>, i. 171-182.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Dr. Nieuwenhuis
on
the games
played by
the Kayans
in connexion
with
agriculture.</note>
<q>Thus,</q> says Dr. Nieuwenhuis, reviewing the agricultural
rites which he witnessed among the Kayans on the Mendalam
river, <q>every fresh operation on the rice-field was ushered in by
religious and culinary ceremonies, during which the community
had always to observe taboos for several nights and to
play certain definite games. As we saw, spinning-top games
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
and masquerades were played during the sowing festival:
at the first bringing in of the rice the people pelted each other
with clay pellets discharged from small pea-shooters, but in
former times sham fights took place with wooden swords;
while during the New Year festival the men contend with
each other in wrestling, high leaps, long leaps, and running.
The women also fight each other with great glee, using
bamboo vessels full of water for their principal weapons.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Serious
religious
or magical
significance
of
the games.</note>
What is the meaning of the sports and pastimes which
custom prescribes to the Kayans on these occasions? Are
they mere diversions meant to while away the tedium of the
holidays? or have they a serious, perhaps a religious or
magical significance? To this question it will be well to let
Dr. Nieuwenhuis give his answer. <q>The Kayans on the
Mendalam river,</q> he says, <q>enjoy tolerably regular harvests,
and their agricultural festivals accordingly take place every
year; whereas the Kayans on the Mahakam river, on
account of the frequent failure of the harvests, can celebrate
a New Year's festival only once in every two or three years.
Yet although these festivities are celebrated more regularly
on the Mendalam river, they are followed on the Mahakam
river with livelier interest, and the meaning of all ceremonies
and games can also be traced much better there. On the
Mendalam river I came to the false conclusion that the
popular games which take place at the festivals are undertaken
quite arbitrarily at the seasons of sowing and harvest;
but on the Mahakam river, on the contrary, I observed that
even the masquerade at the sowing festival is invested with
as deep a significance as any of the ceremonies performed by
the priestesses.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<q>The influence of religious worship, which dominates the
whole life of the Dyak tribes, manifests itself also in their
games. This holds good chiefly of pastimes in which all
adults take part together, mostly on definite occasions; it is
less applicable to more individual pastimes which are not
restricted to any special season. Pastimes of the former
sort are very rarely indulged in at ordinary times, and
properly speaking they attain their full significance only on
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
the occasion of the agricultural festivals which bear a strictly
religious stamp. Even then the recreations are not left to
choice, but definite games belong to definite festivals; thus
at the sowing festivals other amusements are in vogue than
at the little harvest festival or the great harvest festival at
the beginning of the reaping, and at the New Year festival....
Is this connexion between festivals and games merely
an accidental one, or is it based on a real affinity? The
latter seems to me the more probable view, for in the case
of one of the most important games played by men I was
able to prove directly a religious significance; and although
I failed to do so in the case of the others, I conjecture,
nevertheless, that a religious idea lies at the bottom of all
other games which are connected with definite festivals.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, ii. 130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The game as to
the religious significance of which Dr.
Nieuwenhuis has no doubt is the
masquerade performed by the Kayans
of the Mahakam river, where disguised
men personate spirits and pretend to
draw home the souls of the rice from
the far countries to which they may
have wandered. See below, pp. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Kai,
an agricultural
people of
German
New
Guinea. Superstitious
practices
observed
by the Kai
for the
good of
the crops.</note>
If the reader should entertain any doubt on the subject,
and should suspect that in arriving at this conclusion the
Dutch traveller gave the reins to his fancy rather than
followed the real opinion of the people, these doubts and
suspicions will probably be dispelled by comparing the
similar games which another primitive agricultural people
avowedly play for the purpose of ensuring good crops.
The people in question are the Kai of German New Guinea,
who inhabit the rugged, densely wooded mountains inland
from Finsch Harbour. They subsist mainly on the produce
of the taro and yams which they cultivate in their fields,
though the more inland people also make much use of
sweet potatoes. All their crops are root crops. No patch
of ground is cultivated for more than a year at a time. As
soon as it has yielded a crop, it is deserted for another and
is quickly overgrown with rank weeds, bamboos, and bushes.
In six or eight years, when the undergrowth has died out
under the shadow of the taller trees which have shot up, the
land may again be cleared and brought under cultivation.
Thus the area of cultivation shifts from year to year; and
the villages are not much more permanent; for in the damp
tropical climate the wooden houses soon rot and fall into
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
ruins, and when this happens the site of the village is
changed.<note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <q>Aus dem Leben der
Kaileute,</q> in R. Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch
Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp. 3,
9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> To procure good crops of the taro and yams, on
which they depend for their subsistence, the Kai resort to
many superstitious practices. For example, in order to
make the yams strike deep roots, they touch the shoots
with the bone of a wild animal that has been killed in
the recesses of a cave, imagining that just as the creature
penetrated deep into the earth, so the shoots that have been
touched with its bone will descend deep into the ground.
And in order that the taro may bear large and heavy fruit,
they place the shoots, before planting them, on a large and
heavy block of stone, believing that the stone will communicate
its valuable properties of size and weight to the future
fruit. Moreover, great use is made of spells and incantations
to promote the growth of the crops, and all persons who utter
such magical formulas for this purpose have to abstain from
eating certain foods until the plants have sprouted and give
promise of a good crop. For example, they may not eat
young bamboo shoots, which are a favourite article of diet
with the people. The reason is that the young shoots are
covered with fine prickles, which cause itching and irritation
of the skin; from which the Kai infer that if an enchanter
of field fruits were to eat bamboo shoots, the contagion of
their prickles would be conveyed through him to the fruits
and would manifest itself in a pungent disagreeable flavour.
For a similar reason no charmer of the crops who knows
his business would dream of eating crabs, because he is well
aware that if he were to do so the leaves and stalks of the
plants would be dashed in pieces by a pelting rain, just like
the long thin brittle legs of a dead crab. Again, were such
an enchanter to eat any of the edible kinds of locusts, it
seems obvious to the Kai that locusts would devour the
crops over which the imprudent wizard had recited his
spells. Above all, people who are concerned in planting
fields must on no account eat pork; because pigs, whether
wild or tame, are the most deadly enemies of the crops,
which they grub up and destroy; from which it follows, as
surely as the night does the day, that if you eat pork while
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
you are at work on the farm, your fields will be devastated
by inroads of pigs.<note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 123-125.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Games
played by
the Kai
people
to promote
the growth
of the yams
and taro. Tales and
legends
told by the
Kai to
cause the
fruits of
the earth
to thrive.</note>
However, these precautions are not the only measures
which the Kai people adopt for the benefit of the yams and
the taro. <q>In the opinion of the natives various games
are important for a proper growth of the field-fruits;
hence these games may only be played in the time after
the work on the fields has been done. Thus to swing
on a long Spanish reed fastened to a branch of a tree is
thought to have a good effect on the newly planted yams.
Therefore swinging is practised by old and young, by men
and women. No one who has an interest in the growth of
his crop in the field leaves the swing idle. As they swing
to and fro they sing swing-songs. These songs often
contain only the names of the kinds of yams that have been
planted, together with the joyous harvest-cry repeated with
variations, <q>I have found a fine fruit!</q> In leaping from
the swing, they cry <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kakulili</foreign>!</q> By calling out the name
of the yams they think to draw their shoots upwards out of
the ground. A small bow with a string, on which a wooden
flag adorned with a feather is made to slide down (the Kai
call the instrument <foreign rend='italic'>tawatawa</foreign>), may only be used when the
yams are beginning to wind up about their props. The
tender shoots are then touched with the bow, while a song
is sung which is afterwards often repeated in the village. It
runs thus: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Mama gelo, gelowaineja, gelowaineja; kikí tambai,
kíki tambai.</foreign></q> The meaning of the words is unknown. The
intention is to cause a strong upward growth of the plants.
In order that the foliage of the yams may sprout luxuriantly
and grow green and spread, the Kai people play cat's cradle.
Each of the intricate figures has a definite meaning and a
name to match: for example <q>the flock of pigeons</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Hulua</foreign>),
<q>the Star,</q> <q>the Flying Fox,</q> <q>the Sago-palm Fan,</q> <q>the
Araucaria,</q> <q>the Lizard and the Dog,</q> <q>the Pig,</q> <q>the Sentinel-box
in the Fields,</q> <q>the Rat's Nest,</q> <q>the Wasp's Nest in
the Bamboo-thicket,</q> <q>the Kangaroo,</q> <q>the Spider's Web,</q>
<q>the Little Children,</q> <q>the Canoe,</q> <q>Rain and Sunshine,</q>
<q>the Pig's Pitfall,</q> <q>the Fish-spawn,</q> <q>the Two Cousins,
Kewâ and Imbiâwâ, carrying their dead Mother to the
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
Grave,</q> etc. By spinning large native acorns or a sort
of wild fig they think that they foster the growth of the
newly-planted taro; the plants will <q>turn about and broaden.</q>
The game must therefore only be played at the time when
the taro is planted. The same holds good of spearing at
the stalks of taro leaves with the ribs of sago leaves used as
miniature spears. This is done when the taro leaves have
unfolded themselves, but when the plants have not yet set
any tubers. A single leaf is cut from a number of stems, and
these leaves are brought into the village. The game is played
by two partners, who sit down opposite to each other at a distance
of three or four paces. A number of taro stalks lie beside
each. He who has speared all his adversary's stalks first is
victor; then they change stalks and the game begins again.
By piercing the leaves they think that they incite the plants
to set tubers. Almost more remarkable than the limitation
of these games to the time when work on the fields
is going forward is the custom of the Kai people which
only permits the tales of the olden time or popular
legends to be told at the time when the newly planted
fruits are budding and sprouting.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At the end of every
such tale the Kai story-teller mentions the names of
the various kinds of yams and adds, <q>Shoots (for the new
planting) and fruits (to eat) in abundance!</q> <q>From their
concluding words we see that the Kai legends are only
told for a quite definite purpose, namely, to promote the
welfare of the yams planted in the field. By reviving the
memory of the ancient beings, to whom the origin of
the field-fruits is referred, they imagine that they influence
the growth of the fruits for good. When the planting is
over, and especially when the young plants begin to sprout,
the telling of legends comes to an end. In the villages it is
always only a few old men who as good story-tellers can
hold the attention of their hearers.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Keysser, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 161.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus
among
these New
Guinea
people
games are
played and
stories told
as charms
to ensure
good crops.</note>
Thus with these New Guinea people the playing of
certain games and the recital of certain legends are alike
magical in their intention; they are charms practised to
ensure good crops. Both sets of charms appear to be based
on the principles of sympathetic magic. In playing the
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
games the players perform acts which are supposed to mimic
or at all events to stimulate the corresponding processes in
the plants: by swinging high in the air they make the plants
grow high; by playing cat's cradle they cause the leaves of
the yams to spread and the stalks to intertwine, even as
the players spread their hands and twine the string about
their fingers; by spinning fruits they make the taro plants
to turn and broaden; and by spearing the taro leaves
they induce the plants to set tubers.<note place='foot'>On the principles of homoeopathic
or imitative magic, see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art
and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
The Esquimaux play cat's cradle as a
charm to catch the sun in the meshes
of the string and so prevent him from
sinking below the horizon in winter.
See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cat's cradle is
played as a game by savages in many
parts of the world, including the Torres
Straits Islands, the Andaman Islands,
Africa, and America. See A. C. Haddon,
<hi rend='italic'>The Study of Man</hi> (London and
New York, 1898), pp. 224-232; Miss
Kathleen Haddon, <hi rend='italic'>Cat's Cradles from
Many Lands</hi> (London, 1911). For example,
the Indians of North-western
Brazil play many games of cat's cradle,
each of which has its special name, such
as the Bow, the Moon, the Pleiades, the
Armadillo, the Spider, the Caterpillar,
and the Guts of the Tapir. See Th.
Koch-Grünberg, <hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre unter den
Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910), i. 120,
123, 252, 253, ii. 127, 131. Finding
the game played as a magical rite to stay
the sun or promote the growth of the
crops among peoples so distant from
each other as the Esquimaux and the
natives of New Guinea, we may reasonably
surmise that it has been put to
similar uses by many other peoples,
though civilised observers have commonly
seen in it nothing more than a
pastime. Probably many games have
thus originated in magical rites.
When their old serious meaning was
forgotten, they continued to be practised
simply for the amusement they afforded
the players. Another such game seems
to be the <q>Tug of War.</q> See <hi rend='italic'>The
Golden Bough</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> iii. 95.</note> In telling the
legends the story-tellers mention the names of the powerful
beings who first created the fruits of the earth, and the
mere mention of their names avails, on the principle of
the magical equivalence of names and persons or things,
to reproduce the effect.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, pp. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The recitation of tales as a charm
to promote the growth of the crops is not peculiar to the Kai.
It is practised also by the Bakaua, another tribe of German
New Guinea, who inhabit the coast of Huon Gulf, not far
from the Kai. These people tell stories in the evening at the
time when the yams and taro are ripe, and the stories always
end with a prayer to the ancestral spirits, invoked under
various more or less figurative designations, such as <q>a man</q>
or <q>a cricket,</q> that they would be pleased to cause countless
shoots to sprout, the great tubers to swell, the sugar-cane to
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
thrive, and the bananas to hang in long clusters. <q>From this
we see,</q> says the missionary who reports the custom, <q>that
the object of telling the stories is to prove to the ancestors,
whose spirits are believed to be present at the recitation of
the tales which they either invented or inherited, that people
always remember them; for which reason they ought to be
favourable to their descendants, and above all to bestow their
blessings on the shoots which are ready to be planted or on
the plants already in the ground.</q> As the story-teller utters
the prayer, he looks towards the house in which the young
shoots ready for planting or the ripe fruits are deposited.<note place='foot'>Stefan Lehner, "Bukaua," in R.
Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(Berlin, 1911) pp. 478 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Yabim
of German
New
Guinea
also tell
tales on
purpose
to obtain
abundant
crops.</note>
Similarly, the Yabim, a neighbouring tribe of German
New Guinea, at the entrance to Huon Gulf, tell tales for
the purpose of obtaining a plentiful harvest of yams, taro,
sugar-cane, and bananas.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, p. 386.</note> They subsist chiefly by the
fruits of the earth which they cultivate, and among which
taro, yams, and sugar-cane supply them with their staple
food.<note place='foot'>H. Zahn, <q>Die Jabim,</q> in R.
Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(Berlin, 1911) p. 290.</note> In their agricultural labours they believe themselves
to be largely dependent on the spirits of their dead, the
<foreign rend='italic'>balum</foreign>, as they call them. Before they plant the first taro in
a newly cleared field they invoke the souls of the dead to
make the plants grow and prosper; and to propitiate these
powerful spirits they bring valuable objects, such as boar's
tusks and dog's teeth, into the field, in order that the ghosts
may deck themselves with the souls of these ornaments,
while at the same time they minister to the grosser appetites
of the disembodied spirits by offering them a savoury mess
of taro porridge. Later in the season they whirl bull-roarers
in the fields and call out the names of the dead,
believing that this makes the crops to thrive.<note place='foot'>H. Zahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 332 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Specimens
of Yabim
tales told
as charms
to procure
a good
harvest. Such tales
may be
called
narrative
spells.</note>
But besides the prayers which they address to the spirits of
the dead for the sake of procuring an abundant harvest, the
Yabim utter spells for the same purpose, and these spells sometimes
take the form, not of a command, but of a narrative.
Here, for instance, is one of their spells: <q>Once upon a time
a man laboured in his field and complained that he had no
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
taro shoots. Then came two doves flying from Poum. They
had devoured much taro, and they perched on a tree in the
field, and during the night they vomited all the taro up.
Thus the man got so many taro shoots that he was even
able to sell some of them to other people.</q> Or, again, if
the taro will not bud, the Yabim will have recourse to the
following spell: <q>A muraena lay at ebb-tide on the shore.
It seemed to be at its last gasp. Then the tide flowed
on, and the muraena came to life again and plunged
into the deep water.</q> This spell is pronounced over
twigs of a certain tree (<foreign rend='italic'>kalelong</foreign>), while the enchanter
smites the ground with them. After that the taro is sure to
bud.<note place='foot'>H. Zahn, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 333.</note> Apparently the mere recitation of such simple tales is
thought to produce the same effect as a direct appeal, whether
in the shape of a prayer or a command, addressed to the
spirits. Such incantations may be called narrative spells to
distinguish them from the more familiar imperative spells,
in which the enchanter expresses his wishes in the form
of direct commands. Much use seems to be made of such
narrative spells among the natives of this part of German
New Guinea. For example, among the Bukaua, who attribute
practically boundless powers to sorcerers in every
department of life and nature, the spells by which these
wizards attempt to work their will assume one of two
forms: either they are requests made to the ancestors, or
they are short narratives, addressed to nobody in particular,
which the sorcerer mutters while he is performing his
magical rites.<note place='foot'>Stefan Lehner, <q>Bukaua,</q> in R.
Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>, iii.
(Berlin, 1911) p. 448.</note> It is true, that here the distinction is drawn
between narratives and requests rather than between
narratives and commands; but the difference of a request
from a command, though great in theory, may be
very slight in practice; so that prayer and spell, in the
ordinary sense of the words, may melt into each other
almost imperceptibly. Even the priest or the enchanter who
utters the one may be hardly conscious of the hairbreadth
that divides it from the other. In regard to narrative spells,
it seems probable that they have been used much more extensively
among mankind than the evidence at our disposal permits
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
us positively to affirm; in particular we may conjecture
that many ancient narratives, which we have been accustomed
to treat as mere myths, used to be regularly recited in
magical rites as spells for the purpose of actually producing
events like those which they describe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
bull-roarer
to quicken
the fruits of
the earth.</note>
The use of the bull-roarer to quicken the fruits of the
earth is not peculiar to the Yabim. On the other side of
New Guinea the instrument is employed for the same
purpose by the natives of Kiwai, an island at the mouth
of the Fly River. They think that by whirling bull-roarers
they produce good crops of yams, sweet potatoes, and
bananas; and in accordance with this belief they call
the implement <q>the mother of yams.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, in <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition
to Torres Straits</hi>, v. (Cambridge,
1904) pp. 218, 219. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Head-hunters, Black, White, and
Brown</hi> (London, 1901) p. 104.</note> Similarly in
Mabuiag, an island in Torres Straits, the bull-roarer is looked
upon as an instrument that can be used to promote the
growth of garden produce, such as yams and sweet potatoes;
certain spirits were supposed to march round the gardens at
night swinging bull-roarers for this purpose.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, in <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition
to Torres Straits</hi>, v. (Cambridge,
1904) pp. 346 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Indeed a
fertilising or prolific virtue appears to be attributed to the
instrument by savages who are totally ignorant of agriculture.
Thus among the Dieri of central Australia, when a
young man had undergone the painful initiatory ceremony
of having a number of gashes cut in his back, he used to be
given a bull-roarer, whereupon it was believed that he
became inspired by the spirits of the men of old, and
that by whirling it, when he went in search of game before
his wounds were healed, he had power to cause a good
harvest of lizards, snakes, and other reptiles. On the other
hand, the Dieri thought that if a woman were to see a bull-roarer
that had been used at the initiatory ceremonies and
to learn its secret, the tribe would ever afterwards be
destitute of snakes, lizards, and other such food.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>The Dieri
and other kindred Tribes of Central
Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xx. (1891) p.
83; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South-East
Australia</hi> (London, 1904), p.
660. The first, I believe, to point
out the fertilising power ascribed to
the bull-roarer by some savages was
Dr. A. C. Haddon. See his essay,
<q>The Bull-roarer,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>The Study of
Man</hi> (London and New York, 1898),
pp. 277-327. In this work Dr. Haddon
recognises the general principle of
the possible derivation of many games
from magical rites. As to the bull-roarer
compare my paper <q>On some
Ceremonies of the Central Australian
Tribes,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Report of the Australasian
Association for the Advancement
of Science for the year 1900</hi> (Melbourne,
1901), pp. 313-322.</note> It may
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
very well be that a similar power to fertilise or multiply
edible plants and animals has been ascribed to the bull-roarer
by many other peoples who employ the implement in
their mysteries.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Swinging
as an agricultural
charm.</note>
Further, it is to be observed that just as the Kai of
New Guinea swing to and fro on reeds suspended from the
branches of trees in order to promote the growth of the
crops, in like manner Lettish peasants in Russia devote
their leisure to swinging in spring and early summer for
the express purpose of making the flax grow as high as
they swing in the air.<note place='foot'>J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsch-russischen
Ostseeprovinzen</hi> (Dresden and Leipsic,
1841), ii. 25.</note> And we may suspect that wherever
swinging is practised as a ceremony at certain times of the
year, particularly in spring and at harvest, the pastime is
not so much a mere popular recreation as a magical rite
designed to promote the growth of the crops.<note place='foot'>For the evidence see <hi rend='italic'>The Dying
God</hi>, pp. 277-285.</note>
</p>

<p>
With these examples before us we need not hesitate to
believe that Dr. Nieuwenhuis is right when he attributes a
deep religious or magical significance to the games which
the Kayans or Bahaus of central Borneo play at their
various agricultural festivals.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy of
the Kayans
of Borneo
to the
Greeks of
Eleusis in
the early
time. The Sacred
Ploughing
at Eleusis.</note>
It remains to point out how far the religious or magical
practices of these primitive agricultural peoples of Borneo
and New Guinea appear to illustrate by analogy the original
nature of the rites of Eleusis. So far as we can recompose,
from the broken fragments of tradition, a picture of the
religious and political condition of the Eleusinian people
in the olden time, it appears to tally fairly well with the
picture which Dr. Nieuwenhuis has drawn for us of the
Kayans or Bahaus at the present day in the forests of
central Borneo. Here as there we see a petty agricultural
community ruled by hereditary chiefs who, while they
unite religious to civil authority, being bound to preside
over the numerous ceremonies performed for the good of
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
the crops,<note place='foot'>On the Kayan chiefs and their
religious duties, see A. W. Nieuwenhuis,
<hi rend='italic'>Quer durch Borneo</hi>, i. 58-60.</note> nevertheless lead simple patriarchal lives and
are so little raised in outward dignity above their fellows
that their daughters do not deem it beneath them to fetch
water for the household from the village well.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</note> Here as
there we see a people whose whole religion is dominated
and coloured by the main occupation of their lives; who
believe that the growth of the crops, on which they depend
for their subsistence, is at the mercy of two powerful spirits,
a divine husband and his wife, dwelling in a subterranean
world; and who accordingly offer sacrifices and perform
ceremonies in order to ensure the favour of these mighty
beings and so to obtain abundant harvests. If we knew
more about the Rarian plain at Eleusis,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</note> we might discover
that it was the scene of many religious ceremonies
like those which are performed on the little consecrated
rice-fields (the <foreign rend='italic'>luma lali</foreign>) of the Kayans, where the
various operations of the agricultural year are performed
in miniature by members of the chief's family before the
corresponding operations may be performed on a larger
scale by common folk on their fields. Certainly we know
that the Rarian plain witnessed one such ceremony in the
year. It was a solemn ceremony of ploughing, one of the
three Sacred Ploughings which took place annually in
various parts of Attica.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Praecepta Conjugalia</hi>,
42. Another of these Sacred Ploughings
was performed at Scirum, and
the third at the foot of the Acropolis
at Athens; for in this passage of
Plutarch we must, with the latest
editor, read ὑπὸ πόλιν for the ὑπὸ
πέλιν of the manuscripts.</note> Probably the rite formed part of
the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Proerosia</foreign> or Festival before Ploughing, which was intended
to ensure a plentiful crop.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Further, it appears that the
priests who guided the sacred slow-paced oxen as they dragged
the plough down the furrows of the Rarian Plain, were drawn
from the old priestly family of Bouzygai or <q>Ox-yokers,</q>
whose eponymous ancestor is said to have been the first man
to yoke oxen and to plough the fields. As they performed
this time-honoured ceremony, the priests uttered many quaint
curses against all churls who should refuse to lend fire or water
to neighbours, or to shew the way to wanderers, or who should
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
leave a corpse unburied.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
Βουζυγία, p. 206, lines 47 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Im.
Bekker, <hi rend='italic'>Anecdota Graeca</hi> (Berlin, 1814-1821),
i. 221; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii.
199; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Βουζύγης; καθίστατο
δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς καὶ ὁ τοὺς ἱεροὺς
ἀρότους ἐπιτελῶν Βουζύγης; <hi rend='italic'>Paroemiographi
Graeci</hi>, ed. E. L. Leutsch und
F. G. Schneidewin (Göttingen, 1839-1851),
i. 388, Βουζύγης; ἐπὶ τῶν πολλὰ
ἀρωμένων. Ὁ γὰρ Βουζύγης Ἀθήνησιν ὁ
τὸν ἱερὸν ἄροτον ἐπιτελῶν ... ἄλλα τε
πολλὰ ἀρᾶται καὶ τοῖς μὴ κοινωνοῦσι κατὰ
τὸν Βίον ὕδατος ἢ πυρὸς ἢ μὴ ὑποφαίνουσιν
ὁδὸν πλανωμένοις; Scholiast on Sophocles,
<hi rend='italic'>Antigone</hi>, 255, λόγος δὲ ὅτι
Βουζύγης Ἀθήνησι κατηράσατο τοῖς
περιορῶσιν ἄταφον σῶμα. The Sacred
Ploughing at the foot of the Acropolis
was specially called <foreign rend='italic'>bouzygios</foreign> (Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praecepta Conjugalia</hi>, 42). Compare
J. Toepffer, <hi rend='italic'>Attische Genealogie</hi> (Berlin,
1889) pp. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> If we had a complete list of the
execrations fulminated by the holy ploughmen on these
occasions, we might find that some of them were levelled at
the impious wretches who failed to keep all the rules of the
Sabbath, as we may call those periods of enforced rest and
seclusion which the Kayans of Borneo and other primitive
agricultural peoples observe for the good of the crops.<note place='foot'>Such Sabbaths are very commonly
and very strictly observed in connexion
with the crops by the agricultural hill
tribes of Assam. The native name
for such a Sabbath is <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>. See T.
C. Hodson, <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>Genna</foreign> amongst the
Tribes of Assam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvi. (1906)
pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>Communal tabus are
observed by the whole village....
Those which are of regular occurrence
are for the most part connected with
the crops. Even where irrigated
terraces are made, the rice plant is
much affected by deficiencies of rain
and excess of sun. Before the crop is
sown, the village is tabu or <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>.
The gates are closed and the friend
without has to stay outside, while the
stranger that is within the gates remains
till all is ended. The festival
is marked among some tribes by an
outburst of licentiousness, for, so long
as the crops remain ungarnered, the
slightest incontinence might ruin all.
An omen of the prosperity of the crops
is taken by a mock contest, the girls
pulling against the men. In some
villages the <foreign rend='italic'>gennas</foreign> last for ten days,
but the tenth day is the crowning day
of all. The men cook, and eat apart
from the women during this time, and
the food tabus are strictly enforced.
From the conclusion of the initial crop
<foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign> to the commencement of the
<foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign> which ushers in the harvest-time,
all trade, all fishing, all hunting,
all cutting grass and felling trees is
forbidden. Those tribes which specialise
in cloth-weaving, salt-making
or pottery-making are forbidden the
exercise of these minor but valuable
industries. Drums and bugles are
silent all the while.... Between the
initial crop <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign> and the harvest-home,
some tribes interpose a <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>
day which depends on the appearance
of the first blade of rice. All celebrate
the commencement of the gathering
of the crops by a <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign>, which
lasts at least two days. It is mainly
a repetition of the initial <foreign rend='italic'>genna</foreign> and,
just as the first seed was sown by the
<foreign rend='italic'>gennabura</foreign>, the religious head of the
village, so he is obliged to cut the first
ear of rice before any one else may
begin.</q> On such occasions among
the Kabuis, in spite of the licence
accorded to the people generally, the
strictest chastity is required of the
religious head of the village who initiates
the sowing and the reaping,
and his diet is extremely limited; for
example, he may not eat dogs or
tomatoes. See T. C. Hodson, <q>The
Native Tribes of Manipur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxi.
(1901) pp. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; and for more
details, <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Naga Tribes of Manipur</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
The resemblance of some of these
customs to those of the Kayans of
Borneo is obvious. We may conjecture
that the <q>tug of war</q> which
takes place between the sexes on
several of these Sabbaths was originally
a magical ceremony to ensure good
crops rather than merely a mode of
divination to forecast the coming harvest.
Magic regularly dwindles into
divination before it degenerates into a
simple game. At one of these taboo
periods the men set up an effigy of a
man and throw pointed bamboos at
it. He who hits the figure in the
head will kill an enemy; he who hits
it in the belly will have plenty of food.
See T. C. Hodson, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvi. (1906)
p. 95; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Naga Tribes of Manipur</hi>,
p. 171. Here also we probably
have an old magical ceremony passing
through a phase of divination before it
reaches the last stage of decay. On
Sabbaths observed in connexion with
agriculture in Borneo and Assam, see
further Hutton Webster, <hi rend='italic'>Rest Days,
a Sociological Study</hi>, pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>University
Studies</hi>, Lincoln, Nebraska,
vol. xi. Nos. 1-2, January-April,
1911).</note>
</p>

<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The connexion
of the
Eleusinian
games with
agriculture,
attested
by the
ancients,
is confirmed
by
modern
savage
analogies.</note>
Further, when we see that many primitive peoples
practise what we call games but what they regard in all
seriousness as solemn rites for the good of the crops, we
may be the more inclined to accept the view of the ancients,
who associated the Eleusinian games directly with the
worship of Demeter and Persephone, the Corn Goddesses.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</note>
One of the contests at the Eleusinian games was in leaping,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> note 5.</note>
and we know that even in modern Europe to this day
leaping or dancing high is practised as a charm to make
the crops grow tall.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 137-139.</note> Again, the bull-roarer was swung
so as to produce a humming sound at the Greek
mysteries;<note place='foot'>See the old Greek scholiast on
Clement of Alexandria, quoted by Chr.
Aug. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi> (Königsberg,
1829), p. 700; Andrew Lang,
<hi rend='italic'>Custom and Myth</hi> (London, 1884), p.
39. It is true that the bull-roarer seems
to have been associated with the rites
of Dionysus rather than of Demeter;
perhaps the sound of it was thought to
mimick the bellowing of the god in
his character of a bull. But the worship
of Dionysus was from an early
time associated with that of Demeter
in the Eleusinian mysteries; and the
god himself, as we have seen, had
agricultural affinities. See above, p.
<ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>. An annual festival of swinging
(which, as we have seen, is still practised
both in New Guinea and Russia
for the good of the crops) was held by
the Athenians in antiquity and was
believed to have originated in the
worship of Dionysus. See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying
God</hi>, pp. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and when we find the same simple instrument
whirled by savages in New Guinea for the sake of ensuring
good crops, we may reasonably conjecture that it was
whirled with a like intention by the rude forefathers of the
Greeks among the cornfields of Eleusis. If that were so&mdash;though
the conjecture is hardly susceptible of demonstration&mdash;it
would go some way to confirm the theory that the
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
Eleusinian mysteries were in their origin nothing more than
simple rustic ceremonies designed to make the farmer's
fields to wave with yellow corn. And in the practice of
the Kayans, whose worship of the rice offers many analogies
to the Eleusinian worship of the corn, may we not detect a
hint of the origin of that rule of secrecy which always
characterised the Eleusinian mysteries? May it not have
been that, just as the Kayans exclude strangers from their
villages while they are engaged in the celebration of religious
rites, lest the presence of these intruders should frighten or
annoy the shy and touchy spirits who are invoked at these
times, so the old Eleusinians may have debarred foreigners
from participation in their most solemn ceremonies, lest the
coy goddesses of the corn should take fright or offence at
the sight of strange faces and so refuse to bestow on men
their annual blessing? The admission of foreigners to the
privilege of initiation in the mysteries was probably a late
innovation introduced at a time when the fame of their
sanctity had spread far and wide, and when the old magical
meaning of the ritual had long been obscured, if not
forgotten.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sacred
drama
of the
Eleusinian
mysteries
compared
to the
masked
dances of
agricultural
savages.</note>
Lastly, it may be suggested that in the masked dances
and dramatic performances, which form a conspicuous
and popular feature of the Sowing Festival among the
Kayans,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, and below, pp. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> we have the savage counterpart of that drama
of divine death and resurrection which appears to have
figured so prominently in the mysteries of Eleusis.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</note>
If my interpretation of that solemn drama is correct, it
represented in mythical guise the various stages in the growth
of the corn for the purpose of magically fostering the natural
processes which it simulated. In like manner among the
Kaua and Kobeua Indians of North-western Brazil, who subsist
chiefly by the cultivation of manioc, dances or rather pantomimes
are performed by masked men, who represent spirits
or demons of fertility, and by imitating the act of procreation
are believed to stimulate the growth of plants as well as to
quicken the wombs of women and to promote the multiplication
of animals. Coarse and grotesque as these dramatic
performances may seem to us, they convey no suggestion of
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
indecency to the minds either of the actors or of the
spectators, who regard them in all seriousness as rites destined
to confer the blessing of fruitfulness on the inhabitants
of the village, on their plantations, and on the whole realm
of nature.<note place='foot'>Th. Koch-Grünberg, <hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre
unter den Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910),
i. 137-140, ii. 193-196. As
to the cultivation of manioc among
these Indians see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> ii. 202 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> However, we possess so little exact information
as to the rites of Eleusis that all attempts to elucidate them
by the ritual of savages must necessarily be conjectural.
Yet the candid reader may be willing to grant that conjectures
supported by analogies like the foregoing do not
exceed the limits of a reasonable hypothesis.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Woman's Part in Primitive Agriculture.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theory
that the
personification
of
corn as
feminine
was suggested
by
the part
played by
women in
primitive
agriculture.</note>
If Demeter was indeed a personification of the corn,
it is natural to ask, why did the Greeks personify the
corn as a goddess rather than a god? why did they ascribe
the origin of agriculture to a female rather than to a male
power? They conceived the spirit of the vine as masculine;
why did they conceive the spirit of the barley and wheat as
feminine? To this it has been answered that the personification
of the corn as feminine, or at all events the ascription
of the discovery of agriculture to a goddess, was suggested
by the prominent part which women take in primitive agriculture.<note place='foot'>F. B. Jevons, <hi rend='italic'>Introduction to the
History of Religion</hi> (London, 1896),
p. 240; H. Hirt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Indogermanen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1905-1907), i. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The theory illustrates a recent tendency of mythologists
to explain many myths as reflections of primitive
society rather than as personifications of nature. For that
reason, apart from its intrinsic interest, the theory deserves
to be briefly considered.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Among
many
savage
tribes the
labour of
hoeing the
ground and
sowing the
seed devolves
on
women. Agricultural
work
done by
women
among the
Zulus and
other tribes
of South
Africa.</note>
Before the invention of the plough, which can hardly be
worked without resort to the labour of men, it was and still
is customary in many parts of the world to break up the
soil for cultivation with hoes, and among not a few savage
peoples to this day the task of hoeing the ground and sowing
the seed devolves mainly or entirely upon the women,
while the men take little or no part in cultivation beyond
clearing the land by felling the forest trees and burning the
fallen timber and brushwood which encumber the soil.
Thus, for example, among the Zulus, <q>when a piece of land
has been selected for cultivation, the task of clearing it
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
belongs to the men. If the ground be much encumbered,
this becomes a laborious undertaking, for their axe is very
small, and when a large tree has to be encountered, they
can only lop the branches; fire is employed when it is
needful to remove the trunk. The reader will therefore not
be surprised that the people usually avoid bush-land, though
they seem to be aware of its superior fertility. As a general
rule the men take no further share in the labour of cultivation;
and, as the site chosen is seldom much encumbered
and frequently bears nothing but grass, their part of the
work is very slight. The women are the real labourers;
for (except in some particular cases) the entire business of
digging, planting, and weeding devolves on them; and, if
we regard the assagai and shield as symbolical of the man,
the hoe may be looked upon as emblematic of the woman....
With this rude and heavy instrument the woman digs,
plants, and weeds her garden. Digging and sowing are
generally one operation, which is thus performed; the seed
is first scattered on the ground, when the soil is dug or
picked up with the hoe, to the depth of three or four inches,
the larger roots and tufts of grass being gathered out, but all
the rest left in or on the ground.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of
Natal and the Zulu Country</hi> (London,
1857), pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Speaking of the
Zulus another writer observes: <q>In
gardening, the men clear the land, if
need be, and sometimes fence it in;
the women plant, weed, and harvest</q>
(Rev. L. Grout, <hi rend='italic'>Zulu-land</hi>, Philadelphia,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>, p. 110).</note> A special term of
contempt is applied to any Zulu man, who, deprived of the
services of his wife and family, is compelled by hard
necessity to handle the hoe himself.<note place='foot'>A. Delegorgue, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Afrique
Australe</hi> (Paris, 1847), ii.
225.</note> Similarly among the
Baronga of Delagoa Bay, <q>when the rains begin to fall, sometimes
as early as September but generally later, they hasten
to sow. With her hoe in her hands, the mistress of the field
walks with little steps; every time she lifts a clod of earth
well broken up, and in the hole thus made she plants three
or four grains of maize and covers them up. If she has not
finished clearing all the patch of the bush which she contemplated,
she proceeds to turn up again the fields she tilled
last year. The crop will be less abundant than in virgin
soil, but they plant three or four years successively in the
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
same field before it is exhausted. As for enriching the soil
with manure, they never think of it.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>Les Ba-Ronga</hi>
(Neuchatel, 1908), pp. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Barotsé,
who cultivate millet, maize, and peas to a small extent and
in a rudimentary fashion, women alone are occupied with the
field-work, and their only implement is a spade or hoe.<note place='foot'>L. Decle, <hi rend='italic'>Three Years in Savage
Africa</hi> (London, 1898), p. 85.</note> Of
the Matabelé we are told that <q>most of the hard work is
performed by the women; the whole of the cultivation is
done by them. They plough with short spades of native
manufacture; they sow the fields, and they clear them of
weeds.</q><note place='foot'>L. Decle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 160.</note> Among the Awemba, to the west of Lake Tanganyika,
the bulk of the work in the plantations falls on the
women; in particular the men refuse to hoe the ground.
They have a saying, <q>Is not each male child born for
the axe and each female child for the hoe?</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, <hi rend='italic'>The
Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 302.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Chastity
required in
the sowers
of seed.</note>
The natives of the Tanganyika plateau <q>cultivate the
banana, and have a curious custom connected with it. No
man is permitted to sow; but when the hole is prepared a
little girl is carried to the spot on a man's shoulders. She
first throws into the hole a sherd of broken pottery, and then
scatters the seed over it.</q><note place='foot'>L. Decle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 295.</note> The reason of the latter practice
has been explained by more recent observers of these
natives. <q>Young children, it may here be noted, are often
employed to administer drugs, remedies, even the Poison
Ordeal, and to sow the first seeds. Such acts, the natives
say, must be performed by chaste and innocent hands, lest
a contaminated touch should destroy the potency of the
medicine or of the seedlings planted. It used to be a very
common sight upon the islands of Lake Bangweolo to watch
how a Bisa woman would solve the problem of her own
moral unfitness by carrying her baby-girl to the banana-plot,
and inserting seedlings in the tiny hands for dropping
into the holes already prepared.</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, <hi rend='italic'>The
Great Plateau of Northern Nigeria</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 179.</note> Similarly among the
people of the Lower Congo <q>women must remain chaste
while planting pumpkin and calabash seeds, they are not
allowed to touch any pig-meat, and they must wash their
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
hands before touching the seeds. If a woman does not
observe all these rules, she must not plant the seeds, or the
crop will be bad; she may make the holes, and her baby
girl, or another who has obeyed the restrictions, can drop in
the seeds and cover them over.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Notes on
some Customs of the Lower Congo
People,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xx. (1909) p. 311.</note> We can now perhaps
understand why Attic matrons had to observe strict chastity
when they celebrated the festival of the Thesmophoria.<note place='foot'>In order to guard against any
breach of the rule they strewed <foreign rend='italic'>Agnus
castus</foreign> and other plants, which were
esteemed anaphrodisiacs, under their
beds. See Dioscorides, <hi rend='italic'>De Materia
Medica</hi>, i. 134 (135), vol. i. p. 130,
ed. C. Sprengel (Leipsic, 1829-1830);
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxiv. 59; Aelian,
<hi rend='italic'>De Natura Animalium</hi>, ix. 26;
Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> κνέωρον; Scholiast on
Theocritus, iv. 25; Scholiast on
Nicander, <hi rend='italic'>Ther.</hi> 70 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
Attica that festival was held in honour of Demeter in the
month of Pyanepsion, corresponding to October,<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Thesmophor.</hi>
80; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Demosthenes</hi>, 30;
Aug. Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen
im Altertum</hi> (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 310
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> That Pyanepsion was the month
of sowing is mentioned by Plutarch (<hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 69). See above, pp. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> the season of
the autumn sowing; and the rites included certain ceremonies
which bore directly on the quickening of the seed.<note place='foot'>See below, vol. ii. p. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We may
conjecture that the rule of chastity imposed on matrons at
this festival was a relic of a time when they too, like many
savage women down to the present time, discharged the
important duty of sowing the seed and were bound for that
reason to observe strict continence, lest any impurity on their
part should defile the seed and prevent it from bearing fruit.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Woman's
part in
agriculture
among the
Caffres of
South
Africa in
general.</note>
Of the Caffres of South Africa in general we read that
<q>agriculture is mainly the work of the women, for in olden
days the men were occupied in hunting and fighting. The
women do but scratch the land with hoes, sometimes using
long-handled instruments, as in Zululand, and sometimes
short-handled ones, as above the Zambesi. When the ground
is thus prepared, the women scatter the seed, throwing it over
the soil quite at random. They know the time to sow by the
position of the constellations, chiefly by that of the Pleiades.
They date their new year from the time they can see this
constellation just before sunrise.</q><note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential
Kaffir</hi> (London, 1904), p. 323. Compare
B. Ankermann, <q>L'Ethnographie
actuelle de l'Afrique méridionale,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, i. (1906) pp. 575 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As
to the use of the Pleiades to determine
the time of sowing, see note at the
end of the volume, <q>The Pleiades in
Primitive Calendars.</q></note> In Basutoland, where
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
the women also till the fields, though the lands of chiefs are
dug and sowed by men, an attempt is made to determine
the time of sowing by observation of the moon, but the
people generally find themselves out in their reckoning, and
after much dispute are forced to fall back upon the state of the
weather and of vegetation as better evidence of the season of
sowing. Intelligent chiefs rectify the calendar at the summer
solstice, which they call the summer-house of the sun.<note place='foot'>Rev. E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>
(London, 1861), pp. 143 (with plate),
pp. 162-165.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Agricultural
work
done by
women
among the
Nandi, Baganda, the Congo, and
other tribes
of Central
and
Western
Africa.</note>
Among the Nandi of British East Africa <q>the rough
work of clearing the bush for plantations is performed by
the men, after which nearly all work in connexion with them
is done by the women. The men, however, assist in sowing
the seed, and in harvesting some of the crops. As a rule
trees are not felled, but the bark is stripped off for about
four feet from the ground and the trees are then left to die.
The planting is mostly, if not entirely, done during the first
half of the <foreign rend='italic'>Kiptamo</foreign> moon (February), which is the first
month of the year, and when the <foreign rend='italic'>Iwat-kut</foreign> moon rises
(March) all seed should be in the ground. The chief
medicine man is consulted before the planting operations
begin, but the Nandi know by the arrival in the fields of the
guinea-fowl, whose song is supposed to be, <foreign rend='italic'>O-kol, o-kol; mi-i
tokoch</foreign> (Plant, plant; there is luck in it), that the planting
season is at hand. When the first seed is sown, salt is
mixed with it, and the sower sings mournfully: <foreign rend='italic'>Ak o-siek-u
o-chok-chi</foreign> (And grow quickly), as he sows. After fresh
ground has been cleared, eleusine grain is planted. This
crop is generally repeated the second year, after which
millet is sown, and finally sweet potatoes or some other
product. Most fields are allowed to lie fallow every fourth
or fifth year. The Nandi manure their plantations with turf
ashes.... The eleusine crops are harvested by both men
and women. All other crops are reaped by the women only,
who are at times assisted by the children. The corn is
pounded and winnowed by the women and girls.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 19. However, among the Bantu
Kavirondo, an essentially agricultural
people of British East Africa, both
men and women work in the fields
with large iron hoes. See Sir Harry
Johnston, <hi rend='italic'>The Uganda Protectorate</hi>
(London, 1904), ii. 738.</note> Among
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
the Suk and En-jemusi of British East Africa it is the
women who cultivate the fields and milk the cows.<note place='foot'>M. W. H. Beech, <hi rend='italic'>The Suk</hi> (Oxford,
1911), p. 33.</note> Among
the Wadowe of German East Africa the men clear the forest
and break up the hard ground, but the women sow and
reap the crops.<note place='foot'>F. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>Mit Emin Pascha
ins Herz von Afrika</hi> (Berlin, 1894),
p. 36.</note> So among the Wanyamwezi, who are an
essentially agricultural people, to the south of Lake Victoria
Nyanza, the men cut down the bush and hoe the hard
ground, but leave the rest of the labour of weeding, sowing,
and reaping to the women.<note place='foot'>F. Stuhlmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 75.</note> The Baganda of Central Africa
subsist chiefly on bananas, and among them <q>the garden
and its cultivation have always been the woman's department.
Princesses and peasant women alike looked upon
cultivation as their special work; the garden with its produce
was essentially the wife's domain, and she would under no
circumstances allow her husband to do any digging or
sowing in it. No woman would remain with a man who
did not give her a garden and a hoe to dig it with; if these
were denied her, she would seek an early opportunity to
escape from her husband and return to her relations to
complain of her treatment, and to obtain justice or a
divorce. When a man married he sought a plot of land
for his wife in order that she might settle to work and
provide food for the household.... In initial clearing of
the land it was customary for the husband to take part;
he cut down the tall grass and shrubs, and so left the
ground ready for his wife to begin her digging. The grass
and the trees she heaped up and burned, reserving only so
much as she needed for firewood. A hoe was the only
implement used in cultivation; the blade was heart-shaped
with a prong at the base, by which it was fastened to the
handle. The hoe-handle was never more than two feet long,
so that a woman had to stoop when using it.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 426, 427; compare
pp. 5, 38, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 93, 94, 95,
268.</note> In Kiziba,
a district immediately to the south of Uganda, the tilling of
the soil is exclusively the work of the women. They turn
up the soil with hoes, make holes in the ground with
digging-sticks or their fingers, and drop a few seeds into
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
each hole.<note place='foot'>H. Rehse, <hi rend='italic'>Kiziba, Land und Leute</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1910), p. 53.</note> Among the Niam-Niam of Central Africa <q>the
men most studiously devote themselves to their hunting,
and leave the culture of the soil to be carried on exclusively
by the women</q>;<note place='foot'>G. Schweinfurth, <hi rend='italic'>The Heart of
Africa</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (London, 1878), i. 281.</note> and among the Monbuttoo of the same
region in like manner, <q>whilst the women attend to the
tillage of the soil and the gathering of the harvest, the men,
unless they are absent either for war or hunting, spend the
entire day in idleness.</q><note place='foot'>G. Schweinfurth, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 40.</note> As to the Bangala of the Upper
Congo we read that <q>large farms were made around the
towns. The men did the clearing of the bush, felling the
trees, and cutting down the undergrowth; the women
worked with them, heaping up the grass and brushwood
ready for burning, and helping generally. As a rule the
women did the hoeing, planting, and weeding, but the men
did not so despise this work as never to do it.</q> In this
tribe <q>the food belonged to the woman who cultivated the
farm, and while she supplied her husband with the vegetable
food, he had to supply the fish and meat and share
them with his wife or wives.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <q>Anthropological
Notes on the Bangala of the
Upper Congo River,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxix.
(1909) pp. 117, 128.</note> Amongst the Tofoke, a tribe
of the Congo State on the equator, all the field labour,
except the clearing away of the forest, is performed by the
women. They dig the soil with a hoe and plant maize and
manioc. A field is used only once.<note place='foot'>E. Torday, <q>Der Tofoke,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen
der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft
in Wien</hi>, xli. (1911) p. 198.</note> So with the Ba-Mbala,
a Bantu tribe between the rivers Inzia and Kwilu, the men
clear the ground for cultivation, but all the rest of the work
of tillage falls to the women, whose only tool is an iron
hoe. Fresh ground is cleared for cultivation every year.<note place='foot'>E. Torday and T. A. Joyce,
<q>Notes on the Ethnography of the
Ba-Mbala,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxv. (1905) p. 405.</note>
The Mpongwe of the Gaboon, in West Africa, cultivate
manioc (cassava), maize, yams, plantains, sweet potatoes,
and ground nuts. When new clearings have to be made
in the forest, the men cut down and burn the trees, and the
women put in the crop. The only tool they use is a dibble,
with which they turn up a sod, put in a seed, and cover it
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
over.<note place='foot'>P. B. du Chaillu, <hi rend='italic'>Explorations
and Adventures in Equatorial Africa</hi>
(London, 1861), p. 22.</note> Among the Ashira of the same region the cultivation
of the soil is in the hands of the women.<note place='foot'>P. B. du Chaillu, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 417.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Agricultural
work
done by
women
among the
Indian
tribes of
South
America.</note>
A similar division of labour between men and women
prevails among many primitive agricultural tribes of Indians
in South America. <q>In the interior of the villages,</q> says an
eminent authority on aboriginal South America, <q>the man
often absents himself to hunt or to go into the heart of the
forest in search of the honey of the wild bees, and he always
goes alone. He fells the trees in the places where he
wishes to make a field for cultivation, he fashions his
weapons, he digs out his canoe, while the woman rears the
children, makes the garments, busies herself with the
interior, cultivates the field, gathers the fruits, collects the
roots, and prepares the food. Such is, generally at least,
the respective condition of the two sexes among almost
all the Americans. The Peruvians alone had already, in
their semi-civilised state, partially modified these customs;
for among them the man shared the toils of the other sex or
took on himself the most laborious tasks.</q><note place='foot'>A. D'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>L'Homme Américain
(de l'Amérique Méridionale)</hi> (Paris,
1839), i. 198 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus, to take
examples, among the Caribs of the West Indies the men
used to fell the trees and leave the fallen trunks to cumber
the ground, burning off only the smaller boughs. Then the
women came and planted manioc, potatoes, yams, and
bananas wherever they found room among the tree-trunks.
In digging the ground to receive the seed or the shoots
they did not use hoes but simply pointed sticks. The men,
we are told, would rather have died of hunger than undertake
such agricultural labours.<note place='foot'>Le Sieur de la Borde, <q>Relation
de l'Origine, Mœurs, Coustumes,
Religion, Guerres et Voyages des
Caraibes Sauvages des Isles Antilles
de l'Amerique,</q> pp. 21-23, in <hi rend='italic'>Recueil
de divers Voyages faits en Afrique et
en l'Amerique</hi> (Paris, 1684).</note> Again, the staple vegetable food
of the Indians of British Guiana is cassava bread, made
from the roots of the manioc or cassava plant, which the
Indians cultivate in clearings of the forest. The men fell
the trees, cut down the undergrowth, and in dry weather set
fire to the fallen lumber, thus creating open patches in the
forest which are covered with white ashes. When the rains
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
set in, the women repair to these clearings, heavily laden with
baskets full of cassava sticks to be used as cuttings. These
they insert at irregular intervals in the soil, and so the field is
formed. While the cassava is growing, the women do just
as much weeding as is necessary to prevent the cultivated
plants from being choked by the rank growth of the tropical
vegetation, and in doing so they plant bananas, pumpkin
seeds, yams, sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, red and yellow
peppers, and so forth, wherever there is room for them. At
last in the ninth or tenth month, when the seeds appearing
on the straggling branches of the cassava plants announce
that the roots are ripe, the women cut down the plants and
dig up the roots, not all at once, but as they are required.
These roots they afterwards peel, scrape, and bake into
cassava bread.<note place='foot'>E. F. im Thurn, <hi rend='italic'>Among the
Indians of Guiana</hi> (London, 1883),
pp. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 260 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cultivation
of manioc
by women
among the
Indian
tribes of
tropical
South
America.</note>
In like manner the cassava or manioc plant is cultivated
generally among all the Indian tribes of tropical South
America, wherever the plant will grow; and the cultivation
of it is altogether in the hands of the women, who insert the
sticks in the ground after the fashion already described.<note place='foot'>C. F. Phil. v. Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie
Amerika's, zumal Brasiliens</hi>
(Leipsic, 1867), pp. 486-489. On the
economic importance of the manioc or
cassava plant in the life of the South
American Indians, see further E. J.
Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the New World
called America</hi>, i. (Oxford, 1892) pp.
310 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
For example, among the tribes of the Uaupes River, in the
upper valley of the Amazon, who are an agricultural people
with settled abodes, <q>the men cut down the trees and
brushwood, which, after they have lain some months to
dry, are burnt; and the mandiocca is then planted by the
women, together with little patches of cane, sweet potatoes,
and various fruits. The women also dig up the mandiocca,
and prepare from it the bread which is their main subsistence....
The bread is made fresh every day, as when
it gets cold and dry it is far less palatable. The women
thus have plenty to do, for every other day at least they
have to go to the field, often a mile or two distant, to fetch
the root, and every day to grate, prepare, and bake the
bread; as it forms by far the greater part of their food, and
they often pass days without eating anything else, especially
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
when the men are engaged in clearing the forest.</q><note place='foot'>A. R. Wallace, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro</hi>
(London, 1889), pp. 336, 337 (<hi rend='italic'>The
Minerva Library</hi>). Mr. Wallace's
account of the agriculture of these
tribes is entirely confirmed by the
observations of a recent explorer in
north-western Brazil. See Th. Koch-Grünberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre unter den
Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910), ii.
202-209; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Frauenarbeit bei den
Indianern Nordwest-Brasiliens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mitteilungen
der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft
in Wien</hi>, xxxviii. (1908) pp.
172-174. This writer tells us (<hi rend='italic'>Zwei
Jahre unter den Indianern</hi>, ii. 203)
that these Indians determine the time
for planting by observing certain constellations,
especially the Pleiades.
The rainy season begins when the
Pleiades have disappeared below the
horizon. See Note at end of the
volume.</note> Among
the Tupinambas, a tribe of Brazilian Indians, the wives
<q>had something more than their due share of labour, but
they were not treated with brutality, and their condition was
on the whole happy. They set and dug the mandioc; they
sowed and gathered the maize. An odd superstition prevailed,
that if a sort of earth-almond, which the Portugueze
call <foreign rend='italic'>amendoens</foreign>, was planted by the men, it would not grow.</q><note place='foot'>R. Southey, <hi rend='italic'>History of Brazil</hi>,
vol. i. Second Edition (London, 1822),
p. 253.</note>
Similar accounts appear to apply to the Brazilian Indians
in general: the men occupy themselves with hunting, war,
and the manufacture of their weapons, while the women
plant and reap the crops, and search for fruits in the forest;<note place='foot'>J. B. von Spix und C. F. Ph.
von Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in Brasilien</hi>
(Munich, 1823-1831), i. 381.</note>
above all they cultivate the manioc, scraping the soil clear of
weeds with pointed sticks and inserting the shoots in the
earth.<note place='foot'>K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter
den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi>
(Berlin, 1894), p. 214.</note> Similarly among the Indians of Peru, who cultivate
maize in clearings of the forest, the cultivation of the fields
is left to the women, while the men hunt with bows and
arrows and blowguns in the woods, often remaining away
from home for weeks or even months together.<note place='foot'>J. J. von Tschudi, <hi rend='italic'>Peru</hi> (St.
Gallen, 1846), ii. 214.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Agricultural
work
done by
women
among
savage
tribes in
India, New
Guinea,
and New
Britain.</note>
A similar distribution of labour between the sexes prevails
among some savage tribes in other parts of the world.
Thus among the Lhoosai of south-eastern India the men
employ themselves chiefly in hunting or in making forays
on their weaker neighbours, but they clear the ground and
help to carry home the harvest. However, the main burden
of the bodily labour by which life is supported falls on the
women; they fetch water, hew wood, cultivate the ground,
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
and help to reap the crops.<note place='foot'>Captain T. H. Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Races
of South-Eastern India</hi> (London, 1870),
p. 255.</note> Among the Miris of Assam
almost the whole of the field work is done by the women.
They cultivate a patch of ground for two successive years,
then suffer it to lie fallow for four or five. But they are
deterred by superstitious fear from breaking new ground so
long as the fallow suffices for their needs; they dread to
offend the spirits of the woods by needlessly felling the
trees. They raise crops of rice, maize, millet, yams, and
sweet potatoes. But they seldom possess any implement
adapted solely for tillage; they have never taken to the
plough nor even to a hoe. They use their long straight
swords to clear, cut, and dig with.<note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi> (Calcutta, 1872),
p. 33.</note> Among the Korwas, a
savage hill tribe of Bengal, the men hunt with bows and
arrows, while the women till the fields, dig for wild roots, or
cull wild vegetables. Their principal crop is pulse (<foreign rend='italic'>Cajanus
Indicus</foreign>).<note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 226,
227.</note> Among the Papuans of Ayambori, near Doreh
in Dutch New Guinea, it is the men who lay out the fields
by felling and burning the trees and brushwood in the
forest, and it is they who enclose the fields with fences, but
it is the women who sow and reap them and carry home
the produce in sacks on their backs. They cultivate rice,
millet, and bananas.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nieuw Guinea, ethnographisch en
natuurkundig onderzocht en beschreven</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1862), p. 159.</note> So among the natives of Kaimani
Bay in Dutch New Guinea the men occupy themselves only
with fishing and hunting, while all the field work falls on
the women.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> p. 119; H. von Rosenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi> (Leipsic,
1878), p. 433.</note> In the Gazelle Peninsula of New Britain,
when the natives have decided to convert a piece of grass-land
into a plantation, the men cut down the long grass,
burn it, dig up the soil with sharp-pointed sticks, and enclose
the land with a fence of saplings. Then the women plant
the banana shoots, weed the ground, and in the intervals
between the bananas insert slips of yams, sweet potatoes,
sugar-cane, or ginger. When the produce is ripe, they carry
it to the village. Thus the bulk of the labour of cultivation
devolves on the women.<note place='foot'>P. A. Kleintitschen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Küstenbewohner
der Gazellehalbinsel</hi> (Hiltrup
bei Münster, preface dated Christmas,
1906), pp. 60 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Brown, D.D.,
<hi rend='italic'>Melanesians and Polynesians</hi> (London,
1910), pp. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Division of
agricultural
work
between
men and
women in
the Indian
Archipelago.</note>
Among some peoples of the Indian Archipelago, after
the land has been cleared for cultivation by the men, the
work of planting and sowing is divided between men and
women, the men digging holes in the ground with pointed
sticks, and the women following them, putting the seeds or
shoots into the holes, and then huddling the earth over
them; for savages seldom sow broadcast, they laboriously
dig holes and insert the seed in them. This division of
agricultural labour between the sexes is adopted by various
tribes of Celebes, Ceram, Borneo, Nias, and New Guinea.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix.
(1895) pp. 132, 134; J. Boot, <q>Korte
schets der noordkust van Ceram,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>, Tweede
Serie, x. (1893) p. 672; E. H. Gomes,
<hi rend='italic'>Seventeen Years among the Sea Dyaks
of Borneo</hi> (London, 1911), p. 46; E.
Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi> (Milan,
1890), pp. 590 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; K. Vetter, <hi rend='italic'>Komm
herüber und hilf uns!</hi> Heft 2
(Barmen, 1898), pp. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ch. Keysser,
<q>Aus dem Leben der Kaileute,</q> in
R. Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>,
iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp. 14, 85.</note>
Sometimes the custom of entrusting the sowing of the seed
to women appears to be influenced by superstitious as well as
economic considerations. Thus among the Indians of the
Orinoco, who with an infinitude of pains cleared the jungle
for cultivation by cutting down the forest trees with their
stone axes, burning the fallen lumber, and breaking up the
ground with wooden instruments hardened in the fire, the
task of sowing the maize and planting the roots was
performed by the women alone; and when the Spanish
missionaries expostulated with the men for not helping their
wives in this toilsome duty, they received for answer that as
women knew how to conceive seed and bear children, so the
seeds and roots planted by them bore fruit far more
abundantly than if they had been planted by male hands.<note place='foot'>J. Gumilla, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Naturelle,
Civile et Géographique de l'Orénoque</hi>
(Avignon, 1758), ii. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 183 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Among
savages
who have
not learned
to till the
ground the
task of
collecting
the vegetable food
in the form
of wild
seeds and
roots
generally
devolves on
women.
Examples
furnished
by the
Californian
Indians.</note>
Even among savages who have not yet learned to
cultivate any plants the task of collecting the edible seeds
and digging up the edible roots of wild plants appears to
devolve mainly on women, while the men contribute their
share to the common food supply by hunting and fishing,
for which their superior strength, agility, and courage especially
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
qualify them. For example, among the Indians of
California, who were entirely ignorant of agriculture, the
general division of labour between the sexes in the search
for food was that the men killed the game and caught the
salmon, while the women dug the roots and brought in
most of the vegetable food, though the men helped them to
gather acorns, nuts, and berries.<note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), p. 23.</note> Among the Indians of
San Juan Capistrano in California, while the men passed
their time in fowling, fishing, dancing, and lounging, <q>the
women were obliged to gather seeds in the fields, prepare
them for cooking, and to perform all the meanest offices, as
well as the most laborious. It was painful in the extreme,
to behold them, with their infants hanging upon their
shoulders, groping about in search of herbs or seeds, and
exposed as they frequently were to the inclemency of the
weather.</q><note place='foot'>Father Geronimo Boscana, <q>Chinigchinich,</q>
in [A. Robinson's] <hi rend='italic'>Life in
California</hi> (New York, 1846), p. 287.
Elsewhere the same well-informed
writer observes of these Indians that
<q>they neither cultivated the ground,
nor planted any kind of grain; but
lived upon the wild seeds of the field,
the fruits of the forest, and upon the
abundance of game</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 285).</note> Yet these rude savages possessed a calendar
containing directions as to the seasons for collecting the
different seeds and produce of the earth. The calendar
consisted of lunar months corrected by observation of the
solstices, <q>for at the conclusion of the moon in December,
that is, at the conjunction, they calculated the return of the
sun from the tropic of Capricorn; and another year commenced,
the Indian saying <q>the sun has arrived at his home.</q> ...
They observed with greater attention and celebrated
with more pomp, the sun's arrival at the tropic of Capricorn
than they did his reaching the tropic of Cancer, for the
reason, that, as they were situated ten degrees from the
latter, they were pleased at the sun's approach towards
them; for it returned to ripen their fruits and seeds, to give
warmth to the atmosphere, and enliven again the fields with
beauty and increase.</q> However, the knowledge of the calendar
was limited to the <foreign rend='italic'>puplem</foreign> or general council of the tribe, who
sent criers to make proclamation when the time had come
to go forth and gather the seeds and other produce of the
earth. In their calculations they were assisted by a <foreign rend='italic'>pul</foreign> or
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
astrologer, who observed the aspect of the moon.<note place='foot'>Father Geronimo Boscana, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 302-305. As to the <foreign rend='italic'>puplem</foreign>, see
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> p. 264. The writer says that criers
informed the people <q>when to cultivate
their fields</q> (p. 302). But taken
along with his express statement that
they <q>neither cultivated the ground,
nor planted any kind of grain</q> (p. 285,
see above, p. 125 note 2), this expression
<q>to cultivate their fields</q> must
be understood loosely to denote merely
the gathering of the wild seeds and
fruits.</note> When
we consider that these rude Californian savages, destitute
alike of agriculture and of the other arts of civilised life, yet
succeeded in forming for themselves a calendar based on
observation both of the moon and of the sun, we need not
hesitate to ascribe to the immeasurably more advanced
Greeks at the dawn of history the knowledge of a somewhat
more elaborate calendar founded on a cycle of eight
solar years.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Among the
aborigines
of Australia
the
women
provided
the vegetable
food,
while the
men
hunted.</note>
Among the equally rude aborigines of Australia, to
whom agriculture in every form was totally unknown, the
division of labour between the sexes in regard to the collection
of food appears to have been similar. While the men
hunted game, the labour of gathering and preparing the
vegetable food fell chiefly to the women. Thus with regard
to the Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia we are told
that while the men busied themselves, according to the
season, either with fishing or with hunting emus, opossums,
kangaroos, and so forth, the women and children searched
for roots and plants.<note place='foot'>H. E. A. Meyer, <q>Manners and
Customs of the Encounter Bay Tribe,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>
(Adelaide, 1879), pp. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, among the natives of Western
Australia <q>it is generally considered the province of women
to dig roots, and for this purpose they carry a long, pointed
stick, which is held in the right hand, and driven firmly
into the ground, where it is shaken, so as to loosen the
earth, which is scooped up and thrown out with the fingers
of the left hand, and in this manner they dig with great
rapidity. But the labour, in proportion to the amount
obtained, is great. To get a yam about half an inch in
circumference and a foot in length, they have to dig a hole
above a foot square and two feet in depth; a considerable
portion of the time of the women and children is, therefore,
passed in this employment. If the men are absent upon
any expedition, the females are left in charge of one who is
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
old or sick; and in traversing the bush you often stumble
on a large party of them, scattered about in the forest,
digging roots and collecting the different species of fungus.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) George Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of
Two Expeditions of Discovery in
North-West and Western Australia</hi>
(London, 1841), ii. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
women also collect the nuts from the
palms in the month of March (<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>
ii. 296).</note>
In fertile districts, where the yams which the aborigines use
as food grow abundantly, the ground may sometimes be seen
riddled with holes made by the women in their search for
these edible roots. Thus to quote Sir George Grey: <q>We
now crossed the dry bed of a stream, and from that emerged
upon a tract of light fertile soil, quite overrun with <foreign rend='italic'>warran</foreign>
[yam] plants, the root of which is a favourite article of food
with the natives. This was the first time we had yet seen
this plant on our journey, and now for three and a half consecutive
miles we traversed a fertile piece of land, literally
perforated with the holes the natives had made to dig this
root; indeed we could with difficulty walk across it on that
account, whilst this tract extended east and west as far as
we could see.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) George Grey, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 12.
The yam referred to is a species of
<foreign rend='italic'>Diascorea</foreign>, like the sweet potato.</note> Again, in the valley of the Lower Murray
River a kind of yam (<foreign rend='italic'>Microseris Forsteri</foreign>) grew plentifully
and was easily found in the spring and early summer, when
the roots were dug up out of the earth by the women and
children. The root is small and of a sweetish taste and
grows throughout the greater part of Australia outside
the tropics; on the alpine pastures of the high Australian
mountains it attains to a much larger size and furnishes a
not unpalatable food.<note place='foot'>R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>The Aborigines
of Victoria</hi> (Melbourne, 1878), i. 209.</note> But the women gather edible herbs
and seeds as well as roots; and at evening they may be
seen trooping in to the camp, each with a great bundle of
sow-thistles, dandelions, or trefoil on her head,<note place='foot'>P. Beveridge, <q>Of the Aborigines
inhabiting the Great Lacustrine and
Riverine Depression of the Lower
Murray, Lower Murrumbidgee, Lower
Lachlan, and Lower Darling,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
New South Wales for 1883</hi>, vol. xvii.
(Sydney, 1884) p. 36.</note> or carrying
wooden vessels filled with seeds, which they afterwards
grind up between stones and knead into a paste with water
or bake into cakes.<note place='foot'>R. Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>The Aborigines
of Victoria</hi>, i. 214.</note> Among the aborigines of central
Victoria, while the men hunted, the women dug up edible
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
roots and gathered succulent vegetables, such as the young
tops of the <foreign rend='italic'>munya</foreign>, the sow-thistle, and several kinds of fig-marigold.
The implement which they used to dig up roots
with was a pole seven or eight feet long, hardened in the
fire and pointed at the end, which also served them as a
weapon both of defence and of offence.<note place='foot'>W. Stanbridge, <q>Some Particulars
of the General Characteristics, Astronomy,
and Mythology of the Tribes in
the Central Part of Victoria, South
Australia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S., i. (1861)
p. 291.</note> Among the tribes of
Central Australia the principal vegetable food is the seed of
a species of Claytonia, called by white men <foreign rend='italic'>munyeru</foreign>, which
the women gather in large quantities and winnow by pouring
the little black seeds from one vessel to another so as to let
the wind blow the loose husks away.<note place='foot'>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of Central Australia</hi>
(London, 1899), p. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
digging of
the earth
for wild
fruits may
have led to
the origin
of agriculture.</note>
In these customs observed by savages who are totally
ignorant of agriculture we may perhaps detect some of the
steps by which mankind have advanced from the enjoyment
of the wild fruits of the earth to the systematic cultivation
of plants. For an effect of digging up the earth in the
search for roots has probably been in many cases to enrich
and fertilise the soil and so to increase the crop of roots or
herbs; and such an increase would naturally attract the
natives in larger numbers and enable them to subsist for
longer periods on the spot without being compelled by the
speedy exhaustion of the crop to shift their quarters and
wander away in search of fresh supplies. Moreover, the
winnowing of the seeds on ground which had thus been
turned up by the digging-sticks of the women would naturally
contribute to the same result. For though savages at the
level of the Californian Indians and the aborigines of
Australia have no idea of using seeds for any purpose but
that of immediate consumption, and it has never occurred to
them to incur a temporary loss for the sake of a future gain
by sowing them in the ground, yet it is almost certain that
in the process of winnowing the seeds as a preparation for
eating them many of the grains must have escaped and,
being wafted by the wind, have fallen on the upturned soil
and borne fruit. Thus by the operations of turning up the
ground and winnowing the seed, though neither operation
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
aimed at anything beyond satisfying the immediate pangs
of hunger, savage man or rather savage woman was unconsciously
preparing for the whole community a future and
more abundant store of food, which would enable them to
multiply and to abandon the old migratory and wasteful
manner of life for a more settled and economic mode of
existence. So curiously sometimes does man, aiming his
shafts at a near but petty mark, hit a greater and more
distant target.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The discovery
of
agriculture
due mainly
to women.</note>
On the whole, then, it appears highly probable that as a
consequence of a certain natural division of labour between
the sexes women have contributed more than men towards
the greatest advance in economic history, namely, the
transition from a nomadic to a settled life, from a natural to
an artificial basis of subsistence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Women as
agricultural
labourers
among the
Aryans of
Europe.
The Greek
conception
of the
Corn
Goddess
probably
originated
in a simple
personification
of
the corn.</note>
Among the Aryan peoples of Europe the old practice
of hoeing the ground as a preparation for sowing appears to
have been generally replaced at a very remote period by
the far more effective process of ploughing;<note place='foot'>O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi> (Strasburg,
1901), pp. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 630 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Jena, 1905-1907), ii. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H.
Hirt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Indogermanen</hi>, i. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
263, 274. The use of oxen to draw
the plough is very ancient in Europe.
On the rocks at Bohuslän in Sweden
there is carved a rude representation
of a plough drawn by oxen and guided
by a ploughman: it is believed to date
from the Bronze Age. See H. Hirt,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 286.</note> and as the
labour of ploughing practically necessitates the employment
of masculine strength, it is hardly to be expected that in
Europe many traces should remain of the important part
formerly played by women in primitive agriculture. However,
we are told that among the Iberians of Spain and the
Athamanes of Epirus the women tilled the ground,<note place='foot'>Strabo, iii. 4. 17, p. 165; Heraclides
Ponticus, <q>De rebus publicis,</q> 33,
in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</hi>,
ed. C. Müller, ii. 219.</note> and
that among the ancient Germans the care of the fields was
left to the women and old men.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 15.</note> But these indications of
an age when the cultivation of the ground was committed
mainly to feminine hands are few and slight; and if the
Greek conception of Demeter as a goddess of corn and
agriculture really dates from such an age and was directly
suggested by such a division of labour between the sexes, it
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
seems clear that its origin must be sought at a period far
back in the history of the Aryan race, perhaps long before
the segregation of the Greeks from the common stock and
their formation into a separate people. It may be so, but
to me I confess that this derivation of the conception appears
somewhat far-fetched and improbable; and I prefer to suppose
that the idea of the corn as feminine was suggested
to the Greek mind, not by the position of women in remote
prehistoric ages, but by a direct observation of nature, the
teeming head of corn appearing to the primitive fancy to
resemble the teeming womb of a woman, and the ripe ear
on the stalk being likened to a child borne in the arms or
on the back of its mother. At least we know that similar
sights suggest similar ideas to some of the agricultural
negroes of West Africa. Thus the Hos of Togoland, who
plant maize in February and reap it in July, say that the
maize is an image of a mother; when the cobs are forming,
the mother is binding the infant on her back, but in July
she sinks her head and dies and the child is taken away
from her, to be afterwards multiplied at the next sowing.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin,
1906), p. 313.</note>
When the rude aborigines of Western Australia observe that
a seed-bearing plant has flowered, they call it the Mother of
So-and-so, naming the particular kind of plant, and they
will not allow it to be dug up.<note place='foot'>(Sir) G. Grey, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Two
Expeditions of Discovery in North-west
and Western Australia</hi> (London, 1841),
ii. 292.</note> Apparently they think that
respect and regard are due to the plant as to a mother and
her child. Such simple and natural comparisons, which
may occur to men in any age and country, suffice to
explain the Greek personification of the corn as mother and
daughter, and we need not cast about for more recondite
theories. Be that as it may, the conception of the corn as
a woman and a mother was certainly not peculiar to the
ancient Greeks, but has been shared by them with many
other races, as will appear abundantly from the instances
which I shall cite in the following chapter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Corn-Mother and the Corn-Maiden in
Northern Europe.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Suggested
derivation
of the name
Demeter.</note>
It has been argued by W. Mannhardt that the first part
of Demeter's name is derived from an alleged Cretan word
<foreign rend='italic'>deai</foreign>, <q>barley,</q> and that accordingly Demeter means neither
more nor less than <q>Barley-mother</q> or <q>Corn-mother</q>;<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi> (Strasburg, 1884), pp.
292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> See above, p. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, note 3.</note>
for the root of the word seems to have been applied to
different kinds of grain by different branches of the Aryans.<note place='foot'>O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi> (Strasburg,
1901), pp. 11, 289; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung
und Urgeschichte</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Jena,
1890), pp. 409, 422; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung
und Urgeschichte</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Jena,
1905-1907), ii. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare V.
Hehn, <hi rend='italic'>Kulturpflanzen und Hausthiere
in ihrem Uebergang aus Asien</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>7</hi> (Berlin,
1902), pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
As Crete appears to have been one of the most ancient
seats of the worship of Demeter,<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Theog.</hi> 969 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F.
Lenormant, in Daremberg et Saglio,
<hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités Grecques
et Romaines</hi>, i. 2, p. 1029; Kern, in
Pauly-Wissowa's <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
iv. 2, coll. 2720 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> it would not be surprising
if her name were of Cretan origin. But the etymology is
open to serious objections,<note place='foot'>My friend Professor J. H. Moulton
tells me that there is great doubt as to
the existence of a word δηαί, <q>barley</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>, p. 264, lines
12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), and that the common form of
Demeter's name, <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Dâmâter</foreign> (except in
Ionic and Attic) is inconsistent with η
in the supposed Cretan form. <q>Finally
if δηαί = ζειαί, you are bound to regard
her as a Cretan goddess, or as arising
in some other area where the dialect
changed Indogermanic <foreign rend='italic'>y</foreign> into δ and
not ζ: since Ionic and Attic have ζ,
the two crucial letters of the name tell
different tales</q> (Professor J. H.
Moulton, in a letter to me, dated 19
December 1903).</note> and it is safer therefore to lay
no stress on it. Be that as it may, we have found independent
reasons for identifying Demeter as the Corn-mother,
and of the two species of corn associated with her in Greek
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
religion, namely barley and wheat, the barley has perhaps
the better claim to be her original element; for not only
would it seem to have been the staple food of the Greeks in
the Homeric age, but there are grounds for believing that it
is one of the oldest, if not the very oldest, cereal cultivated
by the Aryan race. Certainly the use of barley in the
religious ritual of the ancient Hindoos as well as of the
ancient Greeks furnishes a strong argument in favour of the
great antiquity of its cultivation, which is known to have
been practised by the lake-dwellers of the Stone Age in
Europe.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herabkunft des
Feuers und des Göttertranks</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Gütersloh,
1886), pp. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; O. Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi>, pp. 11, 12, 289; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
ii. 189, 191, 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Hirt, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Indogermanen</hi> (Strasburg, 1905-1907),
i. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In the oldest Vedic ritual
barley and not rice is the cereal chiefly
employed. See H. Oldenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Religion des Veda</hi> (Berlin, 1894), p. 353.
For evidence that barley was cultivated
in Europe by the lake-dwellers of the
Stone Age, see A. de Candolle, <hi rend='italic'>Origin
of Cultivated Plants</hi> (London, 1884),
pp. 368, 369; R. Munro, <hi rend='italic'>The Lake-dwellings
of Europe</hi> (London, Paris,
and Melbourne, 1890), pp. 497 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
According to Pliny (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii.
72) barley was the oldest of all foods.</note>
</p>

<p>
Analogies to the Corn-mother or Barley-mother of
ancient Greece have been collected in great abundance by
W. Mannhardt from the folk-lore of modern Europe. The
following may serve as specimens.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Corn-mother
among the
Germans
and the
Slavs.</note>
In Germany the corn is very commonly personified
under the name of the Corn-mother. Thus in spring, when
the corn waves in the wind, the peasants say, <q>There comes
the Corn-mother,</q> or <q>The Corn-mother is running over the
field,</q> or <q>The Corn-mother is going through the corn.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi> (Strasburg, 1884), p. 296.
Compare O. Hartung, <q>Zur Volkskunde
aus Anhalt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des
Vereins für Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897)
p. 150.</note>
When children wish to go into the fields to pull the blue
corn-flowers or the red poppies, they are told not to do so,
because the Corn-mother is sitting in the corn and will
catch them.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi> (Strasburg, 1884), p. 297.</note> Or again she is called, according to the crop,
the Rye-mother or the Pea-mother, and children are warned
against straying in the rye or among the peas by threats of
the Rye-mother or the Pea-mother. In Norway also the
Pea-mother is said to sit among the peas.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similar
expressions are current among the Slavs. The Poles and
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
Czechs warn children against the Corn-mother who sits in
the corn. Or they call her the old Corn-woman, and say
that she sits in the corn and strangles the children who
tread it down.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 299. Compare R. Andree,
<hi rend='italic'>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</hi> (Brunswick,
1896), p. 281.</note> The Lithuanians say, <q>The Old Rye-woman
sits in the corn.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 300.</note> Again the Corn-mother is
believed to make the crop grow. Thus in the neighbourhood
of Magdeburg it is sometimes said, <q>It will be a good
year for flax; the Flax-mother has been seen.</q> At
Dinkelsbühl, in Bavaria, down to the latter part of the nineteenth
century, people believed that when the crops on a
particular farm compared unfavourably with those of the
neighbourhood, the reason was that the Corn-mother had
punished the farmer for his sins.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 310.</note> In a village of Styria it is
said that the Corn-mother, in the shape of a female puppet
made out of the last sheaf of corn and dressed in white, may
be seen at midnight in the corn-fields, which she fertilises
by passing through them; but if she is angry with a farmer,
she withers up all his corn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare O.
Hartung, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Corn-mother
in
the last
sheaf. Fertilising
power of
the Corn-mother. The Corn-mother
in
the last
sheaf
among the
Slavs and
in France.</note>
Further, the Corn-mother plays an important part in
harvest customs. She is believed to be present in the
handful of corn which is left standing last on the field; and
with the cutting of this last handful she is caught, or driven
away, or killed. In the first of these cases, the last sheaf
is carried joyfully home and honoured as a divine being.
It is placed in the barn, and at threshing the corn-spirit
appears again.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 316.</note> In the Hanoverian district of Hadeln the
reapers stand round the last sheaf and beat it with sticks
in order to drive the Corn-mother out of it. They call to
each other, <q>There she is! hit her! Take care she doesn't
catch you!</q> The beating goes on till the grain is completely
threshed out; then the Corn-mother is believed to
be driven away.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 316.</note> In the neighbourhood of Danzig the
person who cuts the last ears of corn makes them into a
doll, which is called the Corn-mother or the Old Woman
and is brought home on the last waggon.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
of Holstein the last sheaf is dressed in woman's clothes and
called the Corn-mother. It is carried home on the last
waggon, and then thoroughly drenched with water. The
drenching with water is doubtless a rain-charm.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 317. As to such rain-charms
see <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,
Second Edition, pp. 195-197.</note> In the
district of Bruck in Styria the last sheaf, called the Corn-mother,
is made up into the shape of a woman by the
oldest married woman in the village, of an age from fifty to
fifty-five years. The finest ears are plucked out of it and
made into a wreath, which, twined with flowers, is carried on
her head by the prettiest girl of the village to the farmer or
squire, while the Corn-mother is laid down in the barn to
keep off the mice.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 317.</note> In other villages of the same district
the Corn-mother, at the close of harvest, is carried by two
lads at the top of a pole. They march behind the girl who
wears the wreath to the squire's house, and while he receives
the wreath and hangs it up in the hall, the Corn-mother is
placed on the top of a pile of wood, where she is the centre
of the harvest supper and dance. Afterwards she is hung
up in the barn and remains there till the threshing is over.
The man who gives the last stroke at threshing is called the
son of the Corn-mother; he is tied up in the Corn-mother,
beaten, and carried through the village. The wreath is
dedicated in church on the following Sunday; and on
Easter Eve the grain is rubbed out of it by a seven-years-old
girl and scattered amongst the young corn. At Christmas
the straw of the wreath is placed in the manger to
make the cattle thrive.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 317 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the fertilising power of the
Corn-mother is plainly brought out by scattering the seed
taken from her body (for the wreath is made out of the
Corn-mother) among the new corn; and her influence over
animal life is indicated by placing the straw in the manger.
At Westerhüsen, in Saxony, the last corn cut is made in the
shape of a woman decked with ribbons and cloth. It is
fastened to a pole and brought home on the last waggon.
One of the people in the waggon keeps waving the pole,
so that the figure moves as if alive. It is placed on the
threshing-floor, and stays there till the threshing is done.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 318.</note>
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
Amongst the Slavs also the last sheaf is known as the
Rye-mother, the Wheat-mother, the Oats-mother, the
Barley-mother, and so on, according to the crop. In the
district of Tarnow, Galicia, the wreath made out of the last
stalks is called the Wheat-mother, Rye-mother, or Pea-mother.
It is placed on a girl's head and kept till spring,
when some of the grain is mixed with the seed-corn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> Here
again the fertilising power of the Corn-mother is indicated.
In France, also, in the neighbourhood of Auxerre, the last
sheaf goes by the name of the Mother of the Wheat, Mother
of the Barley, Mother of the Rye, or Mother of the Oats.
They leave it standing in the field till the last waggon is
about to wend homewards. Then they make a puppet out
of it, dress it with clothes belonging to the farmer, and adorn
it with a crown and a blue or white scarf. A branch of a tree
is stuck in the breast of the puppet, which is now called the
Ceres. At the dance in the evening the Ceres is set in the
middle of the floor, and the reaper who reaped fastest dances
round it with the prettiest girl for his partner. After the
dance a pyre is made. All the girls, each wearing a wreath,
strip the puppet, pull it to pieces, and place it on the pyre,
along with the flowers with which it was adorned. Then
the girl who was the first to finish reaping sets fire to the
pile, and all pray that Ceres may give a fruitful year. Here,
as Mannhardt observes, the old custom has remained intact,
though the name Ceres is a bit of schoolmaster's learning.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 318
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Upper Brittany the last sheaf is always made into human
shape; but if the farmer is a married man, it is made double
and consists of a little corn-puppet placed inside of a large
one. This is called the Mother-sheaf. It is delivered to the
farmer's wife, who unties it and gives drink-money in return.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes populaires
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1886),
p. 306.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Harvest-mother
or
the Great
Mother in
the last
sheaf.</note>
Sometimes the last sheaf is called, not the Corn-mother,
but the Harvest-mother or the Great Mother. In the
province of Osnabrück, Hanover, it is called the Harvest-mother;
it is made up in female form, and then the reapers
dance about with it. In some parts of Westphalia the last
sheaf at the rye-harvest is made especially heavy by fastening
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
stones in it. They bring it home on the last waggon
and call it the Great Mother, though they do not fashion
it into any special shape. In the district of Erfurt a very
heavy sheaf, not necessarily the last, is called the Great
Mother, and is carried on the last waggon to the barn,
where all hands lift it down amid a fire of jokes.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 319.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Grandmother
in
the last
sheaf.</note>
Sometimes again the last sheaf is called the Grandmother,
and is adorned with flowers, ribbons, and a woman's
apron. In East Prussia, at the rye or wheat harvest, the
reapers call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf,
<q>You are getting the Old Grandmother.</q> In the neighbourhood
of Magdeburg the men and women servants strive
who shall get the last sheaf, called the Grandmother. Whoever
gets it will be married in the next year, but his or
her spouse will be old; if a girl gets it, she will marry a
widower; if a man gets it, he will marry an old crone. In
Silesia the Grandmother&mdash;a huge bundle made up of three
or four sheaves by the person who tied the last sheaf&mdash;was
formerly fashioned into a rude likeness of the human form.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 320.</note>
In the neighbourhood of Belfast the last sheaf sometimes
goes by the name of the Granny. It is not cut in the usual
way, but all the reapers throw their sickles at it and try to
bring it down. It is plaited and kept till the (next?) autumn.
Whoever gets it will marry in the course of the year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 321.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Old
Woman or
the Old
Man in the
last sheaf.</note>
Oftener the last sheaf is called the Old Woman or the
Old Man. In Germany it is frequently shaped and dressed
as a woman, and the person who cuts it or binds it is said to
<q>get the Old Woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 321, 323, 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Altisheim, in Swabia, when all
the corn of a farm has been cut except a single strip, all
the reapers stand in a row before the strip; each cuts his
share rapidly, and he who gives the last cut <q>has the Old
Woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 323; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Munich,
1848-1855), ii. p. 219, § 403.</note> When the sheaves are being set up in heaps,
the person who gets hold of the Old Woman, which is the
largest and thickest of all the sheaves, is jeered at by the
rest, who call out to him, <q>He has the Old Woman and
must keep her.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 325.</note> The woman who binds the last sheaf is
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
sometimes herself called the Old Woman, and it is said
that she will be married in the next year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 323.</note> In Neusaass,
West Prussia, both the last sheaf&mdash;which is dressed up in
jacket, hat, and ribbons&mdash;and the woman who binds it are
called the Old Woman. Together they are brought home
on the last waggon and are drenched with water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> In
various parts of North Germany the last sheaf at harvest is
made up into a human effigy and called <q>the Old Man</q>;
and the woman who bound it is said <q>to have the Old
Man.</q><note place='foot'>A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848), pp. 396 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
399; K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Meklenburg</hi> (Vienna,
1879-1880), ii. 309, § 1494.</note> At Hornkampe, near Tiegenhof (West Prussia),
when a man or woman lags behind the rest in binding the
corn, the other reapers dress up the last sheaf in the form of
a man or woman, and this figure goes by the laggard's
name, as <q>the old Michael,</q> <q>the idle Trine.</q> It is brought
home on the last waggon, and, as it nears the house, the
bystanders call out to the laggard, <q>You have got the Old
Woman and must keep her.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 323
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Brandenburg the young
folks on the harvest-field race towards a sheaf and jump
over it. The last to jump over it has to carry a straw
puppet, adorned with ribbons, to the farmer and deliver it to
him while he recites some verses. Of the person who thus
carries the puppet it is said that <q>he has the Old Man.</q>
Probably the puppet is or used to be made out of the last corn
cut.<note place='foot'>H. Prahn, <q>Glaube und Brauch
in der Mark Brandenburg,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
des Vereins für Volkskunde</hi>, i. (1891)
pp. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In many districts of Saxony the last sheaf used to be
adorned with ribbons and set upright so as to look like a
man. It was then known as <q>the Old Man,</q> and the
young women brought it back in procession to the farm,
singing as they went, <q>Now we are bringing the Old Man.</q><note place='foot'>K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. p. 233, No.
277 note.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Old
Man or
the Old
Woman in
the last
sheaf.</note>
In West Prussia, when the last rye is being raked
together, the women and girls hurry with the work, for none
of them likes to be the last and to get <q>the Old Man,</q> that
is, a puppet made out of the last sheaf, which must be carried
before the other reapers by the person who was the last
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
to finish.<note place='foot'>R. Krause, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Gebräuche und
Aberglauben in Westpreussen</hi> (Berlin,
preface dated March 1904), p. 51.</note> In Silesia the last sheaf is called the Old Woman
or the Old Man and is the theme of many jests; it is made
unusually large and is sometimes weighted with a stone.
At Girlachsdorf, near Reichenbach, when this heavy sheaf is
lifted into the waggon, they say, <q>That is the Old Man
whom we sought for so long.</q><note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Among the Germans of
West Bohemia the man who cuts the last corn is said to
<q>have the Old Man.</q> In former times it used to be
customary to put a wreath on his head and to play all kinds
of pranks with him, and at the harvest supper he was given
the largest portion.<note place='foot'>A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 189.</note> At Wolletz in Westphalia the last
sheaf at harvest is called the Old Man, and being made up
into the likeness of a man and decorated with flowers it is
presented to the farmer, who in return prepares a feast for the
reapers. About Unna, in Westphalia, the last sheaf at
harvest is made unusually large, and stones are inserted to
increase its weight. It is called <foreign rend='italic'>de greaute meaur</foreign> (the Grey
Mother?), and when it is brought home on the waggon
water is thrown on the harvesters who accompany it.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859),
ii. 184, §§ 512 b, 514.</note>
Among the Wends the man or woman who binds the last
sheaf at wheat harvest is said to <q>have the Old Man.</q>
A puppet is made out of the wheaten straw and ears in the
likeness of a man and decked with flowers. The person
who bound the last sheaf must carry the Old Man home,
while the rest laugh and jeer at him. The puppet is hung
up in the farmhouse and remains till a new Old Man is
made at the next harvest.<note place='foot'>W. von Schulenburg, <hi rend='italic'>Wendisches
Volksthum</hi> (Berlin, 1882), p. 147.</note> At the close of the harvest the
Arabs of Moab bury the last sheaf in a grave in the cornfield,
saying as they do so, <q>We are burying the Old Man,</q>
or <q>The Old Man is dead.</q><note place='foot'>A. Jaussen, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes des Arabes
au pays de Moab</hi> (Paris, 1908), pp.
252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Identification
of the
harvester
with the
corn-spirit.</note>
In some of these customs, as Mannhardt has remarked,
the person who is called by the same name as the last sheaf
and sits beside it on the last waggon is obviously identified
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
with it; he or she represents the corn-spirit which has been
caught in the last sheaf; in other words, the corn-spirit is
represented in duplicate, by a human being and by a sheaf.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 324.</note>
The identification of the person with the sheaf is made still
clearer by the custom of wrapping up in the last sheaf the
person who cuts or binds it. Thus at Hermsdorf in Silesia
it used to be the regular practice to tie up in the last sheaf
the woman who had bound it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 320.</note> At Weiden, in Bavaria, it
is the cutter, not the binder, of the last sheaf who is tied
up in it.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 325.</note> Here the person wrapt up in the corn represents
the corn-spirit, exactly as a person wrapt in branches
or leaves represents the tree-spirit.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The last
sheaf made
unusually
large and
heavy.</note>
The last sheaf, designated as the Old Woman, is often
distinguished from the other sheaves by its size and weight.
Thus in some villages of West Prussia the Old Woman is
made twice as long and thick as a common sheaf, and a
stone is fastened in the middle of it. Sometimes it is made
so heavy that a man can barely lift it.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 324.</note> At Alt-Pillau,
in Samland, eight or nine sheaves are often tied together
to make the Old Woman, and the man who sets it up
grumbles at its weight.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Itzgrund, in Saxe-Coburg,
the last sheaf, called the Old Woman, is made large with
the express intention of thereby securing a good crop next
year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 325. The author of <hi rend='italic'>Die
gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</hi> (Chemnitz,
1759) mentions (p. 891) the
German superstition that the last sheaf
should be made large in order that
all the sheaves next year may be of
the same size; but he says nothing as
to the shape or name of the sheaf.
Compare A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 188.</note> Thus the custom of making the last sheaf unusually
large or heavy is a charm, working by sympathetic magic,
to ensure a large and heavy crop at the following harvest.
In Denmark also the last sheaf is made larger than the
others, and is called the Old Rye-woman or the Old Barley-woman.
No one likes to bind it, because whoever does so
will be sure, they think, to marry an old man or an old
woman. Sometimes the last wheat-sheaf, called the Old
Wheat-woman, is made up in human shape, with head,
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
arms, and legs, and being dressed in clothes is carried
home on the last waggon, while the harvesters sit beside
it drinking and huzzaing.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 327.</note> Of the person who binds the
last sheaf it is said, <q>She or he is the Old Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 328.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Carlin
and the
Maiden in
Scotland.
The Old
Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>)
at
harvest in
the Highlands
of
Scotland.</note>
In Scotland, when the last corn was cut after Hallowmas,
the female figure made out of it was sometimes called the
Carlin or Carline, that is, the Old Woman. But if cut
before Hallowmas, it was called the Maiden; if cut after
sunset, it was called the Witch, being supposed to bring bad
luck.<note place='foot'>J. Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the
Scottish Language</hi>, New Edition
(Paisley, 1879-1882), iii. 206, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Maiden</q>; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 326.</note> Among the Highlanders of Scotland the last corn
cut at harvest is known either as the Old Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>)
or as the Maiden; on the whole the former name seems to
prevail in the western and the latter in the central and
eastern districts. Of the Maiden we shall speak presently;
here we are dealing with the Old Wife. The following
general account of the custom is given by a careful and
well-informed enquirer, the Rev. J. G. Campbell, minister of
the remote Hebridean island of Tiree: <q>The Harvest Old
Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>a Chailleach</foreign>).&mdash;In harvest, there was a struggle to
escape from being the last done with the shearing,<note place='foot'>That is, with the reaping.</note> and when
tillage in common existed, instances were known of a ridge
being left unshorn (no person would claim it) because of it
being behind the rest. The fear entertained was that of
having the <q>famine of the farm</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>gort a bhaile</foreign>), in the shape
of an imaginary old woman (<foreign rend='italic'>cailleach</foreign>), to feed till next
harvest. Much emulation and amusement arose from the
fear of this old woman.... The first done made a doll of
some blades of corn, which was called the <q>old wife,</q> and
sent it to his nearest neighbour. He in turn, when ready,
passed it to another still less expeditious, and the person it
last remained with had <q>the old woman</q> to keep for that
year.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Superstitions
of the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1900), pp. 243 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Old
Wife
(<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>)
in the last
sheaf at
harvest in
the islands
of Lewis
and Islay. The Old
Wife at
harvest in
Argyleshire.
The reaper
of the last
sheaf called
the Winter.</note>
To illustrate the custom by examples, in Bernera,
on the west of Lewis, the harvest rejoicing goes by
the name of the Old Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>) from the last sheaf
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
cut, whether in a township, farm, or croft. Where there
are a number of crofts beside each other, there is always
great rivalry as to who shall first finish reaping, and so
have the Old Wife before his neighbours. Some people
even go out on a clear night to reap their fields after their
neighbours have retired to rest, in order that they may have
the Old Wife first. More neighbourly habits, however,
usually prevail, and as each finishes his own fields he goes
to the help of another, till the whole crop is cut. The reaping
is still done with the sickle. When the corn has been
cut on all the crofts, the last sheaf is dressed up to look as
like an old woman as possible. She wears a white cap, a
dress, an apron, and a little shawl over the shoulders fastened
with a sprig of heather. The apron is tucked up to form a
pocket, which is stuffed with bread and cheese. A sickle,
stuck in the string of the apron at the back, completes her
equipment. This costume and outfit mean that the Old
Wife is ready to bear a hand in the work of harvesting.
At the feast which follows, the Old Wife is placed at the
head of the table, and as the whisky goes round each of the
company drinks to her, saying, <q>Here's to the one that has
helped us with the harvest.</q> When the table has been
cleared away and dancing begins, one of the lads leads out
the Old Wife and dances with her; and if the night is fine
the party will sometimes go out and march in a body to a
considerable distance, singing harvest-songs, while one of
them carries the Old Wife on his back. When the Harvest-Home
is over, the Old Wife is shorn of her gear and used
for ordinary purposes.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, <q>Notes on folk-lore objects collected in Argyleshire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895) pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the island of Islay the last corn
cut also goes by the name of the Old Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>), and
when she has done her duty at harvest she is hung up on the
wall and stays there till the time comes to plough the fields
for the next year's crop. Then she is taken down, and on the
first day when the men go to plough she is divided among
them by the mistress of the house. They take her in their
pockets and give her to the horses to eat when they reach
the field. This is supposed to secure good luck for the next
harvest, and is understood to be the proper end of the Old
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
Wife.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 151.</note> In Kintyre also the name of the Old Wife is given
to the last corn cut.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 149.</note> On the shores of the beautiful Loch
Awe, a long sheet of water, winding among soft green hills,
above which the giant Ben Cruachan towers bold and rugged
on the north, the harvest custom is somewhat different.
The name of the Old Wife (<foreign rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>) is here bestowed, not
on the last corn cut, but on the reaper who is the last to
finish. He bears it as a term of reproach, and is not
privileged to reap the last ears left standing. On the contrary,
these are cut by the reaper who was the first to finish
his <foreign rend='italic'>spagh</foreign> or strip (literally <q>claw</q>), and out of them is
fashioned the Maiden, which is afterwards hung up, according
to one statement, <q>for the purpose of preventing the
death of horses in spring.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the north-east of Scotland
<q>the one who took the last of the grain from the field to
the stackyard was called the <q>winter.</q> Each one did what
could be done to avoid being the last on the field, and when
there were several on the field there was a race to get off.
The unfortunate <q>winter</q> was the subject of a good deal of
teasing, and was dressed up in all the old clothes that could
be gathered about the farm, and placed on the <q>bink</q> to eat
his supper.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Walter Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the
Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland</hi>
(London, 1881), p. 182.</note> So in Caithness the person who cuts the last
sheaf is called Winter and retains the name till the next
harvest.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion and
Myth</hi> (London, 1893), p. 141.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Hag
(<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>)
at harvest
in North
Pembrokeshire.</note>
Usages of the same sort are reported from Wales. Thus
in North Pembrokeshire a tuft of the last corn cut, from six
to twelve inches long, is plaited and goes by the name of the
Hag (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>); and quaint old customs used to be practised
with it within the memory of many persons still alive.
Great was the excitement among the reapers when the last
patch of standing corn was reached. All in turn threw
their sickles at it, and the one who succeeded in cutting it
received a jug of home-brewed ale. The Hag (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>) was
then hurriedly made and taken to a neighbouring farm,
where the reapers were still busy at their work. This was
generally done by the ploughman; but he had to be very
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
careful not to be observed by his neighbours, for if they saw
him coming and had the least suspicion of his errand they
would soon make him retrace his steps. Creeping stealthily
up behind a fence he waited till the foreman of his neighbour's
reapers was just opposite him and within easy reach.
Then he suddenly threw the Hag over the fence and, if
possible, upon the foreman's sickle, crying out
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Boreu y codais i,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hwyr y dilynais i,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Ar ei gwar hi.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Hag
(<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>) at
harvest in
South
Pembrokeshire.
The Carley
at harvest
in Antrim.</note>
On that he took to his heels and made off as fast as he
could run, and he was a lucky man if he escaped without
being caught or cut by the flying sickles which the infuriated
reapers hurled after him. In other cases the Hag was
brought home to the farmhouse by one of the reapers. He
did his best to bring it home dry and without being observed;
but he was apt to be roughly handled by the people of
the house, if they suspected his errand. Sometimes they
stripped him of most of his clothes, sometimes they would
drench him with water which had been carefully stored
in buckets and pans for the purpose. If, however, he
succeeded in bringing the Hag in dry and unobserved, the
master of the house had to pay him a small fine; or sometimes
a jug of beer <q>from the cask next to the wall,</q> which
seems to have commonly held the best beer, would be
demanded by the bearer. The Hag was then carefully
hung on a nail in the hall or elsewhere and kept there all
the year. The custom of bringing in the Hag (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>) into
the house and hanging it up still exists in some farms of
North Pembrokeshire, but the ancient ceremonies which have
just been described are now discontinued.<note place='foot'>D. Jenkyn Evans, in an article
entitled <q>The Harvest Customs of
Pembrokeshire,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Pembroke County
Guardian</hi>, 7th December 1895. In a
letter to me, dated 23 February 1901,
Mr. E. S. Hartland was so good as to
correct the Welsh words in the text.
He tells me that they mean literally,
<q>I rose early, I pursued late on her
neck,</q> and he adds: <q>The idea seems
to be that the man has pursued the
Hag or Corn-spirit to a later refuge,
namely, his neighbour's field not yet
completely reaped, and now he leaves
her for the other reapers to catch.
The proper form of the Welsh word for
Hag is <foreign rend='italic'>Gwrach</foreign>. That is the radical
from <foreign rend='italic'>gwr</foreign>, man; <foreign rend='italic'>gwraig</foreign>, woman.
<foreign rend='italic'>Wrach</foreign> is the <q>middle mutation.</q></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Similar customs at harvest were observed in South
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
Pembrokeshire within living memory. In that part of
the country there used to be a competition between
neighbouring farms to see which would finish reaping
first. The foreman of the reapers planned so as to
finish the reaping in a corner of the field out of sight
of the people on the next farm. There, with the last
handful of corn cut, he would make two Old Women or
Hags (<foreign rend='italic'>wrachs</foreign>). One of them he would send by a lad
or other messenger to be laid secretly in the field where
the neighbours were still at work cutting their corn. The
messenger would disguise himself to look like a stranger,
and jumping the fence and creeping through the corn he
would lay the Hag (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>) in a place where the reapers in
reaping would be sure to find it. Having done so he fled
for dear life, for were the reapers to catch him they would
shut him up in a dark room and not let him out till he had
cleaned all the muddy boots, shoes, and clogs in the house.
The second Hag (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>) was sent or taken by the foreman
of the reapers to his master's farmhouse. Generally he tried
to pop into the house unseen and lay the Hag on the
kitchen table; but if the people of the farm caught him
before he laid it down, they used to drench him with water.
If a foreman succeeded in getting both the Hags (<foreign rend='italic'>wrachs</foreign>)
laid safe in their proper quarters, one at home, the other on a
neighbour's farm, without interruption, it was deemed a great
honour.<note place='foot'>M. S. Clark, <q>An old South
Pembrokeshire Harvest Custom,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xv. (1904) pp. 194-196.</note> In County Antrim, down to some years ago,
when the sickle was finally expelled by the reaping machine,
the few stalks of corn left standing last on the field were
plaited together; then the reapers, blindfolded, threw their
sickles at the plaited corn, and whoever happened to cut it
through took it home with him and put it over his door.
This bunch of corn was called the Carley<note place='foot'>Communicated by my friend Professor
W. Ridgeway.</note>&mdash;probably the
same word as Carlin.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Old
Woman
(the Baba)
at harvest
among
Slavonic
peoples.</note>
Similar customs are observed by Slavonic peoples. Thus
in Poland the last sheaf is commonly called the Baba, that
is, the Old Woman. <q>In the last sheaf,</q> it is said, <q>sits the
Baba.</q> The sheaf itself is also called the Baba, and is
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
sometimes composed of twelve smaller sheaves lashed together.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 328.</note>
In some parts of Bohemia the Baba, made out of
the last sheaf, has the figure of a woman with a great straw
hat. It is carried home on the last harvest-waggon and
delivered, along with a garland, to the farmer by two girls.
In binding the sheaves the women strive not to be last, for
she who binds the last sheaf will have a child next year.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 238.</note>
The last sheaf is tied up with others into a large bundle, and
a green branch is stuck on the top of it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 328 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Sometimes the
harvesters call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf,
<q>She has the Baba,</q> or <q>She is the Baba.</q> She has then
to make a puppet, sometimes in female, sometimes in male
form, out of the corn; the puppet is occasionally dressed
with clothes, often with flowers and ribbons only. The
cutter of the last stalks, as well as the binder of the last
sheaf, was also called Baba; and a doll, called the Harvest-woman,
was made out of the last sheaf and adorned with
ribbons. The oldest reaper had to dance, first with this doll,
and then with the farmer's wife.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 329.</note> In the district of Cracow,
when a man binds the last sheaf, they say, <q>The Grandfather
is sitting in it</q>; when a woman binds it, they say, <q>The Baba
is sitting in it,</q> and the woman herself is wrapt up in the
sheaf, so that only her head projects out of it. Thus encased
in the sheaf, she is carried on the last harvest-waggon
to the house, where she is drenched with water by the whole
family. She remains in the sheaf till the dance is over, and
for a year she retains the name of Baba.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 330.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Old
Woman
(the Baba)
at harvest
in Lithuania.</note>
In Lithuania the name for the last sheaf is Boba (Old
Woman), answering to the Polish name Baba. The Boba is
said to sit in the corn which is left standing last.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> The
person who binds the last sheaf or digs the last potato is the
subject of much banter, and receives and long retains the
name of the Old Rye-woman or the Old Potato-woman.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 331.</note>
The last sheaf&mdash;the Boba&mdash;is made into the form of a
woman, carried solemnly through the village on the last
harvest-waggon, and drenched with water at the farmer's
house; then every one dances with it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Corn-queen
and
the
Harvest-queen.</note>
In Russia also the last sheaf is often shaped and dressed
as a woman, and carried with dance and song to the farmhouse.
Out of the last sheaf the Bulgarians make a doll
which they call the Corn-queen or Corn-mother; it is dressed
in a woman's shirt, carried round the village, and then thrown
into the river in order to secure plenty of rain and dew for
the next year's crop. Or it is burned and the ashes strewn
on the fields, doubtless to fertilise them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 332.</note> The name Queen,
as applied to the last sheaf, has its analogies in central
and northern Europe. Thus, in the Salzburg district of
Austria, at the end of the harvest a great procession takes
place, in which a Queen of the Corn-ears (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Ährenkönigin</foreign>) is
drawn along in a little carriage by young fellows.<note place='foot'>Th. Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Oesterreich</hi>
(Vienna, 1859), p. 310.</note> The
custom of the Harvest Queen appears to have been common
in England. Brand quotes from Hutchinson's <hi rend='italic'>History of
Northumberland</hi> the following: <q>I have seen, in some places,
an image apparelled in great finery, crowned with flowers, a
sheaf of corn placed under her arm, and a scycle in her hand,
carried out of the village in the morning of the conclusive
reaping day, with music and much clamour of the reapers,
into the field, where it stands fixed on a pole all day, and
when the reaping is done, is brought home in like manner.
This they call the Harvest Queen, and it represents the
Roman Ceres.</q><note place='foot'>Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>History of Northumberland</hi>,
ii. <hi rend='italic'>ad finem</hi>, 17, quoted by
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of Great
Britain</hi>, ii. 20, Bohn's edition.</note> Again, the traveller Dr. E. D. Clarke tells
us that <q>even in the town of Cambridge, and centre of our
University, such curious remains of antient customs may be
noticed, in different seasons of the year, which pass without
observation. The custom of blowing horns upon the
first of May (Old Style) is derived from a festival in honour
of Diana. At the <foreign rend='italic'>Hawkie</foreign>, as it is called, or Harvest
Home, I have seen a clown dressed in woman's clothes,
having his face painted, his head decorated with ears of corn,
and bearing about him other symbols of Ceres, carried in a
waggon, with great pomp and loud shouts, through the
streets, the horses being covered with white sheets: and when
I inquired the meaning of the ceremony, was answered by
the people that they were drawing the Morgay (ΜΗΤΗΡ ΓΗ)
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
or Harvest Queen.</q><note place='foot'>E. D. Clarke, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Various
Countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa</hi>,
Part ii., Section First, Second Edition
(London, 1813), p. 229. Perhaps
<foreign rend='italic'>Morgay</foreign> (which Clarke absurdly explains
as μητὴρ γῆ) is a mistake for
<foreign rend='italic'>Hawkie</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Hockey</foreign>. The waggon in
which the last corn was brought from
the harvest field was called the <foreign rend='italic'>hockey</foreign>
cart or <foreign rend='italic'>hock</foreign> cart. In a poem called
<q>The Hock-cart or Harvest Home</q>
Herrick has described the joyous return
of the laden cart drawn by horses
swathed in white sheets and attended
by a merry crowd, some of whom
kissed or stroked the sheaves, while
others pranked them with oak leaves.
See further J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
ii. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, Bohn's edition.
The name <foreign rend='italic'>Hockey</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Hawkie</foreign> is no
doubt the same with the German
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>hokelmei</foreign>, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>hörkelmei</foreign>, or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>harkelmei</foreign>,
which in Westphalia is applied to a
green bush or tree set up in the field at
the end of harvest and brought home in
the last waggon-load; the man who
carries it into the farmhouse is sometimes
drenched with water. See A.
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen
aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 178-180,
§§ 494-497. The word is thought
to be derived from the Low German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>hokk</foreign>
(plural <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>hokken</foreign>), <q>a heap of sheaves.</q>
See Joseph Wright, <hi rend='italic'>English Dialect
Dictionary</hi>, iii. (London, 1902) p. 190,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Hockey,</q> from which it appears
that in England the word has been in
use in Yorkshire, Cambridgeshire, and
Suffolk.</note> Milton must have been familiar with
the custom of the Harvest Queen, for in <hi rend='italic'>Paradise Lost</hi><note place='foot'>Book ix. lines 838-842.</note>
he says:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Adam the while</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Waiting desirous her return, had wove</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Of choicest flow'rs a garland to adorn</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Her tresses, and her rural labours crown,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>As reapers oft are wont their harvest-queen.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
the Old
Woman or
Old Man
at threshing.</note>
Often customs of this sort are practised, not on the
harvest-field but on the threshing-floor. The spirit of the
corn, fleeing before the reapers as they cut down the
ripe grain, quits the reaped corn and takes refuge in the
barn, where it appears in the last sheaf threshed, either to
perish under the blows of the flail or to flee thence to the
still unthreshed corn of a neighbouring farm.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 333 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus the last
corn to be threshed is called the Mother-Corn or the Old
Woman. Sometimes the person who gives the last stroke
with the flail is called the Old Woman, and is wrapt in the
straw of the last sheaf, or has a bundle of straw fastened on
his back. Whether wrapt in the straw or carrying it on his
back, he is carted through the village amid general laughter.
In some districts of Bavaria, Thüringen, and elsewhere, the
man who threshes the last sheaf is said to have the Old
Woman or the Old Corn-woman; he is tied up in straw,
carried or carted about the village, and set down at last
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
on the dunghill, or taken to the threshing-floor of a neighbouring
farmer who has not finished his threshing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 334.</note> In Poland
the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is called
Baba (Old Woman); he is wrapt in corn and wheeled
through the village.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>,
p. 334.</note> Sometimes in Lithuania the last sheaf
is not threshed, but is fashioned into female shape and
carried to the barn of a neighbour who has not finished
his threshing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 336.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The man
who gives
the last
stroke at
threshing
is called the
Corn-fool,
the Oats-fool,
etc.</note>
At Chorinchen, near Neustadt, the man who gives the
last stroke at threshing is said to <q>get the Old Man.</q><note place='foot'>A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848), p. 397.</note>
In various parts of Austrian Silesia he is called the corn-fool,
the oats-fool, and so forth according to the crop, and
retains the name till the next kind of grain has been reaped.
Sometimes he is called the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Klöppel</foreign> or mallet. He is much
ridiculed and in the Bennisch district he is dressed out
in the threshing-implements and obliged to carry them
about the farmyard to the amusement of his fellows. In
Dobischwald the man who gives the last stroke at threshing
has to carry a log or puppet of wood wrapt in straw to a
neighbour who has not yet finished his threshing. There
he throws his burden into the barn, crying, <q>There you
have the Mallet (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Klöppel</foreign>),</q> and makes off as fast as he can.
If they catch him, they tie the puppet on his back, and
he is known as the Mallet (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Klöppel</foreign>) for the whole of the
year; he may be the Corn-mallet or the Wheat-mallet or
so forth according to the particular crop.<note place='foot'>A. Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</hi>
(Troppau, 1865-1867),
ii. 270.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The man
who gives
the last
stroke at
threshing
is said to
get the Old
Woman
or the
Old Man. The Corn-woman
at
threshing.</note>
About Berneck, in Upper Franken, the man who gives
the last stroke at threshing runs away. If the others catch
him, he gets <q>the Old Woman,</q> that is, the largest dumpling,
which elsewhere is baked in human shape. The custom of
setting a dumpling baked in the form of an old woman
before the man who has given the last stroke at threshing is
also observed in various parts of Middle Franken. Sometimes
the excised genitals of a calf are served up to him
at table.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi>, iii. (Munich,
1865) pp. 344, 969.</note> At Langenbielau in Silesia the last sheaf, which
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
is called <q>the Old Man,</q> is threshed separately and the
corn ground into meal and baked into a loaf. This loaf is
believed to possess healing virtue and to bring a blessing;
hence none but members of the family may partake of it.
At Wittichenau, in the district of Hoyerswerda (Silesia),
when the threshing is ended, some of the straw of <q>the
Old Man</q> is carried to a neighbour who has not yet finished
his threshing, and the bearer is rewarded with a gratuity.<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 67.</note>
Among the Germans of the Falkenauer district in West
Bohemia the man who gives the last stroke at threshing
gets <q>the Old Man,</q> a hideous scarecrow, tied on his back.
If threshing is still proceeding at another farm, he may go
thither and rid himself of his burden, but must take care
not to be caught. In this way a farmer who is behind-hand
with his threshing may receive several such scarecrows,
and so become the target for many gibes. Among the
Germans of the Planer district in West Bohemia, the man
who gives the last stroke at threshing is himself called <q>the
Old Man.</q> Similarly at flax-dressing in Silberberg (West
Bohemia), the woman who is the last to finish her task is
said to get the Old Man, and a cake baked in human form
is served up to her at supper.<note place='foot'>A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), pp. 193, 194, 197.</note> The Wends of Saxony say
of the man who gives the last stroke at threshing that <q>he
has struck the Old Man</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>wón je stareho bil</foreign>), and he is
obliged to carry a straw puppet to a neighbour, who
has not yet finished his threshing, where he throws
the puppet unobserved over the fence.<note place='foot'>R. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Sächsische Volkskunde</hi>
(Dresden, 1901), p. 360.</note> In some parts
of Sweden, when a stranger woman appears on the
threshing-floor, a flail is put round her body, stalks of
corn are wound round her neck, a crown of ears is placed
on her head, and the threshers call out, <q>Behold the Corn-woman.</q>
Here the stranger woman, thus suddenly appearing,
is taken to be the corn-spirit who has just been expelled by
the flails from the corn-stalks.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt. <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 336.</note> In other cases the farmer's
wife represents the corn-spirit. Thus in the Commune
of Saligné, Canton de Poiret (Vendée), the farmer's wife,
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
along with the last sheaf, is tied up in a sheet, placed on a
litter, and carried to the threshing machine, under which
she is shoved. Then the woman is drawn out and the
sheaf is threshed by itself, but the woman is tossed in
the sheet, as if she were being winnowed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 336; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 612.</note> It would be
impossible to express more clearly the identification of the
woman with the corn than by this graphic imitation of
threshing and winnowing her. Mitigated forms of the
custom are observed in various places. Thus among the
Germans of Schüttarschen in West Bohemia it was customary
at the close of the threshing to <q>throttle</q> the farmer's wife
by squeezing her neck between the arms of a flail till she
consented to bake a special kind of cake called a <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>drischala</foreign>
(from <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>dreschen</foreign>, <q>to thresh</q>).<note place='foot'>A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 194.</note> A similar custom of <q>throttling</q>
the farmer's wife at the threshing is practised in some
parts of Bavaria, only there the pressure is applied by means
of a straw rope instead of a flail.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 437.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
child at
harvest.</note>
In these customs the spirit of the ripe corn is regarded
as old, or at least as of mature age. Hence the names of
Mother, Grandmother, Old Woman, and so forth. But in
other cases the corn-spirit is conceived as young. Thus at
Saldern, near Wolfenbuttel, when the rye has been reaped,
three sheaves are tied together with a rope so as to make a
puppet with the corn ears for a head. This puppet is called
the Maiden or the Corn-maiden (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kornjungfer</foreign>).<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859),
ii. 184 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 515.</note> Sometimes
the corn-spirit is conceived as a child who is separated
from its mother by the stroke of the sickle. This last
view appears in the Polish custom of calling out to
the man who cuts the last handful of corn, <q>You
have cut the navel-string.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>
(Berlin, 1868), p. 28.</note> In some districts of West
Prussia the figure made out of the last sheaf is called
the Bastard, and a boy is wrapt up in it. The woman who
binds the last sheaf and represents the Corn-mother is told
that she is about to be brought to bed; she cries like a
woman in travail, and an old woman in the character of
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
grandmother acts as midwife. At last a cry is raised that
the child is born; whereupon the boy who is tied up in the
sheaf whimpers and squalls like an infant. The grandmother
wraps a sack, in imitation of swaddling bands, round
the pretended baby, who is carried joyfully to the barn, lest
he should catch cold in the open air.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In other parts of North
Germany the last sheaf, or the puppet made out of it, is
called the Child, the Harvest-Child, and so on, and they
call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <q>you are
getting the child.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The last
corn cut
called the
<foreign rend='italic'>mell</foreign>, the
<foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign>, or
the <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign>
in various
parts of
England. The <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign>
cut by
throwing
sickles at it.</note>
In the north of England, particularly in the counties of
Northumberland, Durham, and Yorkshire, the last corn cut
on the field at harvest is or used to be variously known
as the <foreign rend='italic'>mell</foreign> or the <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign>, of which <foreign rend='italic'>kern</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign> are merely
local or dialectical variations. The corn so cut is either
plaited or made up into a doll-like figure, which goes by
the name of the mell-doll or the kirn-doll, or the kirn-baby,
and is brought home with rejoicings at the end of the
harvest.<note place='foot'>Joseph Wright, <hi rend='italic'>English Dialect
Dictionary</hi>, vol. i. (London, 1898)
p. 605 <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Churn</q>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, vol. iii.
(London, 1902) p. 453 <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Kirn</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vol. iv. (London, 1903) pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Sir James Murray, editor of the <hi rend='italic'>New
English Dictionary</hi>, kindly informs me
that the popular etymology which
identifies <foreign rend='italic'>kern</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign> in this sense with
<emph>corn</emph> is entirely mistaken; and that
<q>baby</q> or <q>babbie</q> in the same
phrase means only <q>doll,</q> not
<q>infant.</q> He writes, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kirn-babbie</foreign>
does not mean <q>corn-baby,</q> but
merely <foreign rend='italic'>kirn-doll</foreign>, <emph>harvest-home doll</emph>.
<foreign rend='italic'>Bab</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>babbie</foreign> was even in my youth the
regular name for <q>doll</q> in the district,
as it was formerly in England; the
only woman who sold dolls in Hawick
early in the [nineteenth] century, and
whose toy-shop all bairns knew, was
known as <q>Betty o' the Babs,</q> Betty
of the dolls.</q></note> In the North Riding of Yorkshire the last sheaf
gathered in is called the Mell-sheaf, and the expression
<q>We've gotten wer mell</q> is as much as to say <q>The
Harvest is finished.</q> Formerly a Mell-doll was made out of
a sheaf of corn decked with flowers and wrapped in such of
the reapers' garments as could be spared. It was carried with
music and dancing to the scene of the harvest-supper, which
was called the mell-supper.<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties of England</hi> (London,
1879), pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; M. C. F. Morris,
<hi rend='italic'>Yorkshire Folk-talk</hi>, pp. 212-214.
Compare F. Grose, <hi rend='italic'>Provincial Glossary</hi>
(London, 1811), <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Mell-supper</q>;
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii.
27 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, Bohn's edition; <hi rend='italic'>The Denham
Tracts</hi>, edited by Dr. James Hardy
(London, 1892-1895), ii. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
sheaf out of which the Mell-doll was
made was no doubt the Mell-sheaf,
though this is not expressly said. Dr.
Joseph Wright, editor of <hi rend='italic'>The English
Dialect Dictionary</hi>, kindly informs me
that the word <emph>mell</emph> is well known in
these senses in all the northern counties
of England down to Cheshire. He
tells me that the proposals to connect
<emph>mell</emph> with <q>meal</q> or with <q>maiden</q>
(through a form like the German
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Mädel</foreign>) are inadmissible.</note> In the north of Yorkshire
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
the mell-sheaf <q>was frequently made of such dimensions
as to be a heavy load for a man, and, within a few years
comparatively, was proposed as the prize to be won in a
race of old women. In other cases it was carefully preserved
and set up in some conspicuous place in the farmhouse.</q><note place='foot'>Joseph Wright, <hi rend='italic'>The English
Dialect Dictionary</hi>, vol. iv. (London,
1903) <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Mell,</q> p. 83.</note>
Where the last sheaf of corn cut was called the <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>kern</foreign> instead of the <foreign rend='italic'>mell</foreign>, the customs concerned with it seem
to have been essentially similar. Thus we are told that
in the north it was common for the reapers, on the last day
of the reaping, <q>to have a contention for superiority in
quickness of dispatch, groups of three or four taking each a
ridge, and striving which should soonest get to its termination.
In Scotland, this was called a <foreign rend='italic'>kemping</foreign>, which simply
means a striving. In the north of England, it was a <foreign rend='italic'>mell</foreign>....
As the reapers went on during the last day, they took
care to leave a good handful of the grain uncut, but laid
down flat, and covered over; and, when the field was done,
the <q>bonniest lass</q> was allowed to cut this final handful,
which was presently dressed up with various sewings, tyings,
and trimmings, like a doll, and hailed as a <emph>Corn Baby</emph>. It
was brought home in triumph, with music of fiddles and
bagpipes, was set up conspicuously that night at supper,
and was usually preserved in the farmer's parlour for the
remainder of the year. The bonny lass who cut this handful
of grain was deemed the <emph>Har'st Queen</emph></q>.<note place='foot'>R. Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>The Book of Days</hi>
(Edinburgh, 1886), ii. 377 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
expression <q>Corn Baby</q> used by the
writer is probably his interpretation of
the correct expression <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>kern</foreign>
baby. See above, p. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, note 3. It is
not clear whether the account refers to
England or Scotland. Compare F.
Grose, <hi rend='italic'>Provincial Glossary</hi> (London
1811), <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Kern-baby,</q> <q>an image
dressed up with corn, carried before the
reapers to their mell-supper, or harvest-home</q>;
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
ii. 20; W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of
the Northern Counties of England</hi>,
p. 87.</note> To cut the
last portion of standing corn in the harvest field was known
as <q>to get the kirn</q> or <q>to win the kirn</q>; and as soon as
this was done the reapers let the neighbours know that the
harvest was finished by giving three cheers, which was
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
called <q>to cry or shout the kirn.</q><note place='foot'>Joseph Wright, <hi rend='italic'>The English
Dialect Dictionary</hi>, iii. (London, 1902)
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Kirn,</q> p. 453.</note> Where the last handful
of standing corn was called the <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign>, the stalks were
roughly plaited together, and the reapers threw their sickles
at it till some one cut it through, which was called <q>cutting
the churn.</q> The severed churn (that is, the plaited corn) was
then placed over the kitchen door or over the hob in the
chimney for good luck, and as a charm against witchcraft.<note place='foot'>Joseph Wright, <hi rend='italic'>The English
Dialect Dictionary</hi>, i. (London, 1898)
p. 605.</note>
In Kent the Ivy Girl is, or used to be, <q>a figure composed
of some of the best corn the field produces, and made as well
as they can into a human shape; this is afterwards curiously
dressed by the women, and adorned with paper trimmings,
cut to resemble a cap, ruffles, handkerchief, etc., of the finest
lace. It is brought home with the last load of corn from the
field upon the waggon, and they suppose entitles them to a
supper at the expense of the employer.</q><note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii.
21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The last
corn cut
called the
<foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign> in
some parts
of Scotland.
The <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign>
cut by
reapers
blindfold.</note>
In some parts of Scotland, as well as in the north of England,
the last handful of corn cut on the harvest-field was called
the <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign>, and the person who carried it off was said <q>to win the
kirn.</q> It was then dressed up like a child's doll and went by
the name of the kirn-baby, the kirn-doll, or the Maiden.<note place='foot'>J. Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Etymological Dictionary
of the Scottish Language</hi>, New
Edition (Paisley, 1879-1882), iii. 42
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Kirn.</q></note> In
Berwickshire down to about the middle of the nineteenth
century there was an eager competition among the reapers
to cut the last bunch of standing corn. They gathered
round it at a little distance and threw their sickles in turn
at it, and the man who succeeded in cutting it through gave
it to the girl he preferred. She made the corn so cut into
a kirn-dolly and dressed it, and the doll was then taken to
the farmhouse and hung up there till the next harvest, when
its place was taken by the new kirn-dolly.<note place='foot'>Mrs. A. B. Gomme, <q>A Berwickshire
Kirn-dolly,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xii. (1901)
p. 215.</note> At Spottiswoode
(Westruther Parish) in Berwickshire the reaping of the last
corn at harvest was called <q>cutting the Queen</q> almost as
often as <q>cutting the kirn.</q> The mode of cutting it was
not by throwing sickles. One of the reapers consented to
be blindfolded, and having been given a sickle in his hand
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
and turned twice or thrice about by his fellows, he was
bidden to go and cut the kirn. His groping about and
making wild strokes in the air with his sickle excited much
hilarity. When he had tired himself out in vain and given
up the task as hopeless, another reaper was blindfolded and
pursued the quest, and so on, one after the other, till at last
the kirn was cut. The successful reaper was tossed up in
the air with three cheers by his brother harvesters. To
decorate the room in which the kirn-supper was held at
Spottiswoode as well as the granary, where the dancing
took place, two women made kirn-dollies or Queens every
year; and many of these rustic effigies of the corn-spirit
might be seen hanging up together.<note place='foot'>Mrs. A. B. Gomme, <q>Harvest
Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xiii. (1902) p.
178.</note> At Lanfine in Ayrshire,
down to near the end of the nineteenth century, the
last bunch of standing corn at harvest was, occasionally at
least, plaited together, and the reapers tried to cut it by
throwing their sickles at it; when they failed in the attempt,
a woman has been known to run in and sever the stalks at
a blow. In Dumfriesshire also, within living memory, it
used to be customary to cut the last standing corn by throwing
the sickles at it.<note place='foot'>J. G. Frazer, <q>Notes on Harvest
Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vii. (1889) p.
48.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign>
in Ireland
cut by
throwing
the sickles
at it.</note>
In the north of Ireland the harvest customs were
similar, but there, as in some parts of England, the
last patch of standing corn bore the name of the <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign>,
a dialectical variation of <foreign rend='italic'>kirn</foreign>. <q>The custom of <q>Winning
the Churn</q> was prevalent all through the counties of Down
and Antrim fifty years ago. It was carried out at the
end of the harvest, or reaping the grain, on each farm or
holding, were it small or large. Oats are the main crop of
the district, but the custom was the same for other kinds of
grain. When the reapers had nearly finished the last field
a handful of the best-grown stalks was selected, carefully
plaited as it stood, and fastened at the top just under the
ears to keep the plait in place. Then when all the corn was
cut from about this, which was known as <foreign rend='italic'>The Churn</foreign>, and
the sheaves about it had been removed to some distance,
the reapers stood in a group about ten yards off it, and each
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
whirled his sickle at the <foreign rend='italic'>Churn</foreign> till one lucky one succeeded
in cutting it down, when he was cheered on his achievement.
This person had then the right of presenting it to the master
or mistress of the farm, who gave the reaper a shilling.</q> A
supper and a dance of the reapers in the farmhouse often
concluded the day. The <foreign rend='italic'>Churn</foreign>, trimmed and adorned with
ribbons, was hung up on a wall in the farmhouse and carefully
preserved. It was no uncommon sight to see six or
even twelve or more such <foreign rend='italic'>Churns</foreign> decorating the walls of
a farmhouse in County Down or Antrim.<note place='foot'>(Rev.) H. W. Lett, <q>Winning the
Churn (Ulster),</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xvi. (1905)
p. 185. My friend Miss Welsh,
formerly Principal of Girton College,
Cambridge, told me (30th May 1901)
that she remembers the custom of the
<foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign> being observed in the north of
Ireland; the reapers cut the last handful
of standing corn (called the <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign>)
by throwing their sickles at it, and the
corn so cut was taken home and kept
for some time.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The last
corn cut
called the
Maiden in
the Highlands
of
Scotland.</note>
In some parts of the Highlands of Scotland the last
handful of corn that is cut by the reapers on any particular
farm is called the Maiden, or in Gaelic <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Maidhdeanbuain</foreign>,
literally <q>the shorn Maiden.</q> Superstitions attach to the
winning of the Maiden. If it is got by a young person,
they think it an omen that he or she will be married before
another harvest. For that or other reasons there is a strife
between the reapers as to who shall get the Maiden, and
they resort to various stratagems for the purpose of securing
it. One of them, for example, will often leave a handful of
corn uncut and cover it up with earth to hide it from the
other reapers, till all the rest of the corn on the field is cut
down. Several may try to play the same trick, and the one
who is coolest and holds out longest obtains the coveted
distinction. When it has been cut, the Maiden is dressed
with ribbons into a sort of doll and affixed to a wall of
the farmhouse. In the north of Scotland the Maiden is
carefully preserved till Yule morning, when it is divided
among the cattle "to make them thrive all the year round."<note place='foot'>J. Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Scottish
Language</hi>, New Edition (Paisley,
1879-1882), iii. 206, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Maiden.</q>
An old Scottish name for the Maiden
(<foreign rend='italic'>autumnalis nymphula</foreign>) was <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Rapegyrne</foreign>.
See Fordun, <hi rend='italic'>Scotichren</hi>. ii. 418, quoted
by J. Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 624, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Rapegyrne.</q></note>
In the island of Mull and some parts of the mainland of
Argyleshire the last handful of corn cut is called the Maiden
(<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Maighdean-Bhuana</foreign>). Near Ardrishaig, in Argyleshire, the
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
Maiden is made up in a fanciful three-cornered shape,
decorated with ribbons, and hung from a nail on the wall.<note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi.
(1895) pp. 149, 151.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The cutting
of the
Maiden at
harvest in
Argyleshire.</note>
The following account of the Maiden was obtained in
the summer of 1897 from the manager of a farm near
Kilmartin in Argyleshire: <q>The <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Mhaighdean-Bhuana</foreign>, or
<emph>Reaping Maiden</emph>, was the last sheaf of oats to be cut on
a croft or farm. Before the reaping-machine and binder
took the place of the sickle and the scythe, the young
reapers of both sexes, when they neared the end of the
last rig or field, used to manœuvre to gain possession of
the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Mhaighdean-Bhuana</foreign>. The individual who was fortunate
enough to obtain it was <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex officio</foreign> entitled to be the King
or the Queen of the Harvest-Home festival. The sheaf so
designated was carefully preserved and kept intact until the
day they began leading home the corn. A tuft of it was
then given to each of the horses, as they started from the
corn-field with their first load. The rest of it was neatly made
up, and hung in some conspicuous corner of the farmhouse,
where it remained till it was replaced by a younger sister
next season. On the first day of ploughing a tuft of it
was given (as on the first day of leading home the corn) as
a <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Sainnseal</foreign> or handsel for luck to the horses. The <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Mhaighdean-Bhuana</foreign>
so preserved and used was a symbol that the
harvest had been duly secured, and that the spring work
had been properly inaugurated. It was also believed to
be a protection against fairies and witchcraft.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. M. MacPhail (Free Church
Manse, Kilmartin, Lochgilphead),
<q>Folk-lore from the Hebrides,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xi. (1900) p. 441. That the Maiden,
hung up in the house, is thought to keep
out witches till the next harvest is mentioned
also by the Rev. J. G. Campbell,
<hi rend='italic'>Superstitions of the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1900), p.
20. So with the <foreign rend='italic'>churn</foreign> (above, p. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The cutting
of the
Maiden at
harvest in
Perthshire.</note>
In the parish of Longforgan, situated at the south-eastern
corner of Perthshire, it used to be customary to give what
was called the Maiden Feast at the end of the harvest. The
last handful of corn reaped on the field was called the Maiden,
and things were generally so arranged that it fell into the
hands of a pretty girl. It was then decked out with ribbons
and brought home in triumph to the music of bagpipes and
fiddles. In the evening the reapers danced and made merry.
Afterwards the Maiden was dressed out, generally in the
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
form of a cross, and hung up, with the date attached to it,
in a conspicuous part of the house.<note place='foot'>Sir John Sinclair, <hi rend='italic'>Statistical
Account of Scotland</hi>, xix. (Edinburgh,
1797), pp. 550 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare Miss
E. J. Guthrie, <hi rend='italic'>Old Scottish Customs</hi>
(London and Glasgow, 1885), pp.
130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the neighbourhood
of Balquhidder, Perthshire, the last handful of corn is cut
by the youngest girl on the field, and is made into the rude
form of a female doll, clad in a paper dress, and decked
with ribbons. It is called the Maiden, and is kept in the
farmhouse, generally above the chimney, for a good while,
sometimes till the Maiden of the next year is brought in.
The writer of this book witnessed the ceremony of cutting
the Maiden at Balquhidder in September 1888.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi. (1888) pp.
268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A lady
friend<note place='foot'>The late Mrs. Macalister, wife of
Professor Alexander Macalister, Cambridge.
Her recollections referred
especially to the neighbourhood of Glen
Farg, some ten or twelve miles to the
south of Perth.</note> informed me that as a young girl she cut the Maiden
several times at the request of the reapers in the neighbourhood
of Perth. The name of the Maiden was given to the
last handful of standing corn; a reaper held the top of the
bunch while she cut it. Afterwards the bunch was plaited,
decked with ribbons, and hung up in a conspicuous place on
the wall of the kitchen till the next Maiden was brought in.
The harvest-supper in this neighbourhood was also called
the Maiden; the reapers danced at it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Maiden at
harvest in
Lochaber.
The cutting
of the
Maiden at
harvest on
the Gareloch
in
Dumbartonshire.</note>
In the Highland district of Lochaber dancing and merry-making
on the last night of harvest used to be universal and
are still generally observed. Here, we are told, the festivity
without the Maiden would be like a wedding without the bride.
The Maiden is carried home with tumultuous rejoicing, and
after being suitably decorated is hung up in the barn, where
the dancing usually takes place. When supper is over, one
of the company, generally the oldest man present, drinks
a glass of whisky, after turning to the suspended sheaf
and saying, <q>Here's to the Maiden.</q> The company follow
his example, each in turn drinking to the Maiden. Then
the dancing begins.<note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
and Myth</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On some farms on the Gareloch, in
Dumbartonshire, about the year 1830, the last handful of
standing corn was called the Maiden. It was divided in two,
plaited, and then cut with the sickle by a girl, who, it was
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
thought, would be lucky and would soon be married. When
it was cut the reapers gathered together and threw their
sickles in the air. The Maiden was dressed with ribbons
and hung in the kitchen near the roof, where it was kept for
several years with the date attached. Sometimes five or six
Maidens might be seen hanging at once on hooks. The
harvest-supper was called the Kirn.<note place='foot'>From information supplied by
Archie Leitch, late gardener to my
father at Rowmore, Garelochhead.
The Kirn was the name of the harvest
festivity in the south of Scotland also.
See Lockhart's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Scott</hi>, ii. 184
(first edition); <hi rend='italic'>Early Letters of Thomas
Carlyle</hi>, ed. Norton, ii. 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In other farms on the
Gareloch the last handful of corn was called the Maidenhead
or the Head; it was neatly plaited, sometimes decked with
ribbons, and hung in the kitchen for a year, when the grain
was given to the poultry.<note place='foot'>Communicated by the late Mr.
Macfarlane of Faslane, Gareloch.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The cutting
of the
<foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign>
sheaf at
harvest in
Aberdeenshire.</note>
In the north-east of Aberdeenshire the customs connected
with the last corn cut at harvest have been carefully
collected and recorded by the late Rev. Walter Gregor of
Pitsligo. His account runs as follows: <q rend='pre'>The last sheaf cut
is the object of much care: the manner of cutting it, binding
it, and carrying it to the house varies a little in the different
districts. The following customs have been reported to me
by people who have seen them or who have practised them,
and some of the customs have now disappeared. The
information comes from the parishes of Pitsligo, Aberdour,
and Tyrie, situated in the north-east corner of the county of
Aberdeen, but the customs are not limited to these parishes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Some particulars relating to the sheaf may be noted
as always the same; thus (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) it is cut and gathered by the
youngest person present in the field, the person who is
supposed to be the purest; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) the sheaf is not allowed
to touch the ground; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) it is made up and carried in
triumph to the house; (<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>) it occupies a conspicuous place
in the festivals which follow the end of the reaping; (<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) it
is kept till Christmas morning, and is then given to one or
more of the horses or to the cattle of the farm.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign>
sheaf cut
by the
youngest
girl and not
allowed to
touch the
ground.</note>
<q rend='pre'>Before the introduction of the scythe, the corn was cut
by the sickle or <foreign rend='italic'>heuck</foreign>, a kind of curved sickle. The last
sheaf was shorn or cut by the youngest girl present. As
the corn might not touch the ground, the master or <q>gueedman</q>
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
sat down, placed the band on his knees, and received
thereupon each handful as it was cut. The sheaf was bound,
dressed as a woman, and when it had been brought to the
house, it was placed in some part of the kitchen, where
everybody could see it during the meal which followed the
end of the reaping. This sheaf was called the <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign> sheaf.<note place='foot'>A slightly different mode of
making up the <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign> sheaf is described
by the Rev. Walter Gregor elsewhere
(<hi rend='italic'>Notes on the Folk-lore of the North-east
of Scotland</hi>, London, 1881, pp. 181
sq.): <q>The <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign> sheaf was cut by
the maidens on the harvest field. On
no account was it allowed to touch the
ground. One of the maidens seated
herself on the ground, and over her
knees was the band of the sheaf laid.
Each of the maidens cut a handful,
or more if necessary, and laid it on
the band. The sheaf was then bound,
still lying over the maiden's knees, and
dressed up in woman's clothing.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The manner of receiving and binding the last sheaf is
not always the same. Here is another: three persons hold
the band in their hands, one of them at each end, while the
third holds the knot in the middle. Each handful of corn
is placed so that the cut end is turned to the breast of those
who support the ears on the opposite side. When all is cut,
the youngest boy ties the knot. Two other bands are
fastened to the sheaf, one near the cut end, the other near
the ears. The sheaf is carried to the house by those who
have helped to cut or bind it (Aberdour).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Since the introduction of the scythe, it is the youngest
boy who cuts the last sheaf; my informant (a woman) told
me that when he was not strong enough to wield the scythe,
his hand was guided by another. The youngest girl gathers
it. When it is bound with three bands, it is cut straight,
and it is not allowed to touch the ground. The youngest
girls carry it to the house. My informant (a woman) told
me that she had seen it decked and placed at the head of
the bed. Formerly, and still sometimes, there was always a
bed in the kitchen (Tyrie).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The corn is not allowed to fall on the ground: the
young girls who gather it take it by the ear and convey
it handful by handful, till the whole sheaf is cut. A woman
who <q>has lost a feather of her wing,</q> as an old woman put
it to me, may not touch it. Sometimes also they merely
put the two hands round the sheaf (New Deer).</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign>
feast or
<q>meal and
ale.</q></note>
<q rend='pre'>Generally a feast and dance follow when all the wheat
is cut. This feast and dance bear the name of <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign> or
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
<q>meal and ale.</q> However, some people do not give <q>meal
and ale</q> till all the cut corn has been got in: then the feast
is called <q>the Winter</q> and they say that a farmer <q>has the
Winter</q> when all his sheaves have been carried home.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At this feast two things are indispensable: a cheese
called the <foreign rend='italic'>clyack-kebback</foreign> and <q>meal and ale.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The cheese <foreign rend='italic'>clyack-kebback</foreign> must be cut by the master of
the house. The first slice is larger than the rest; it is known
by the name of <q>the <foreign rend='italic'>kanave's faang</foreign>,</q>&mdash;the young man's big
slice&mdash;and is generally the share of the herd boy (Tyrie).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The dish called <q>meal and ale</q> is made as follows.
You take a suitable vessel, whether an earthenware pot or
a milk-bowl, if the crockery is scanty; but if on the contrary
the family is well off, they use other special utensils. In
each dish ale is poured and treacle is added to sweeten
it. Then oatmeal is mixed with the sweetened ale till the
whole is of a sufficient consistency. The cook adds whisky
to the mixture in such proportion as she thinks fit. In each
plate is put a ring. To allow the meal time to be completely
absorbed, the dish is prepared on the morning of the
feast. At the moment of the feast the dish or dishes containing
the strong and savoury mixture are set on the
middle of the table. But it is not served up till the end.
Six or seven persons generally have a plate to themselves.
Each of them plunges his spoon into the plate as fast as
possible in the hope of getting the ring; for he who is
lucky enough to get it will be married within the year.
Meantime some of the stuff is swallowed, but often in the
struggle some of it is spilt on the table or the floor.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign>
sheaf in
the dance.</note>
<q rend='pre'>In some districts there used to be and still is dancing
in the evening of the feast. <q>The sheaf</q> figured in the
dances. It was dressed as a girl and carried on the back of
the mistress of the house to the barn or granary which
served as a ballroom. The mistress danced a reel with
<q>the sheaf</q> on her back.</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The <foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign>
sheaf given
to a mare
in foal or
to a cow
in calf.</note>
<q>The woman who gave me this account had been a
witness of what she described when she was a girl. The
sheaf was afterwards carefully stored till the first day of
Christmas, when it was given to eat to a mare in foal, if
there was one on the farm, or, if there was not, to the oldest
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
cow in calf. Elsewhere the sheaf was divided between all
the cows and their calves or between all the horses and
the cattle of the farm. (Related by an eye-witness.)</q><note place='foot'>W. Gregor, <q>Quelques coutumes
du Nord-est du Comté d'Aberdeen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions populaires</hi>, iii.
(October, 1888) pp. 484-487 (wrong
pagination; should be 532-535). This
account, translated into French by M.
Loys Brueyre from the author's English
and translated by me back from French
into English, is fuller than the account
given by the same writer in his <hi rend='italic'>Notes
on the Folk-lore of the North-east of
Scotland</hi> (London, 1881), pp. 181-183.
I have translated <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>une jument ayant
son poulain</foreign></q> by <q>a mare in foal,</q>
and <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>la plus ancienne vache ayant son
veau</foreign></q> by <q>the oldest cow in calf,</q>
because in the author's <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the
Folk-lore of the North-east of Scotland</hi>
(p. 182) we read that the last sheaf was
<q>carefully preserved till Christmas or
New Year morning. On that morning
it was given to a mare in foal,</q> etc.
Otherwise the French words might
naturally be understood of a mare
with its foal and a cow with its calf.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sanctity
attributed
to the
<foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign>
sheaf.
The sacrament
of
barley-meal
and
water at
Eleusis.</note>
In these Aberdeenshire customs the sanctity attributed
to the last corn cut at harvest is clearly manifested, not
merely by the ceremony with which it is treated on the
field, in the house, and in the barn, but also by the great
care taken to prevent it from touching the ground or being
handled by any unchaste person. The reason why the
youngest person on the field, whether a girl or a boy, is
chosen to cut the last standing corn and sometimes to carry
it to the house is no doubt a calculation that the younger
the person the more likely is he or she to be sexually pure.
We have seen that for this reason some negroes entrust the
sowing of the seed to very young girls,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and later on we
shall meet with more evidence in Africa of the notion that
the corn may be handled only by the pure.<note place='foot'>See below, vol. ii. p. 110.</note> And in the
gruel of oat-meal and ale, which the harvesters sup with
spoons as an indispensable part of the harvest supper, have
we not the Scotch equivalent of the gruel of barley-meal and
water, flavoured with pennyroyal, which the initiates at Eleusis
drank as a solemn form of communion with the Barley
Goddess Demeter?<note place='foot'>The drinking of the draught (called
the κυκεών) as a solemn rite in the
Eleusinian mysteries is mentioned by
Clement of Alexandria (<hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> 21,
p. 18, ed. Potter) and Arnobius (<hi rend='italic'>Adversus
Nationes</hi>, v. 26). The composition
of the draught is revealed by
the author of the Homeric <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to
Demeter</hi> (verses 206-211), where he
represents Demeter herself partaking
of the sacred cup. That the compound
was a kind of thick gruel, half-solid,
half-liquid, is mentioned by Eustathius
(on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xi. 638, p. 870).
Compare Miss J. E. Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena
to the Study of Greek Religion</hi>,
Second Edition (Cambridge,
1908), pp. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> May not that mystic sacrament have
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
originated in a simple harvest supper held by Eleusinian
farmers at the end of the reaping?
</p>

<p>
According to a briefer account of the Aberdeenshire
custom, <q>the last sheaf cut, or <q>maiden,</q> is carried home
in merry procession by the harvesters. It is then presented
to the mistress of the house, who dresses it up
to be preserved till the first mare foals. The maiden
is then taken down and presented to the mare as its
first food. The neglect of this would have untoward
effects upon the foal, and disastrous consequences upon farm
operations generally for the season.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Religion and
Myth</hi> (London, 1893), pp. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
from MS. notes of Miss J. Ligertwood.</note> In Fifeshire the last
handful of corn, known as the Maiden, is cut by a young
girl and made into the rude figure of a doll, tied with ribbons,
by which it is hung on the wall of the farm-kitchen till the
next spring.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) p.
51; <hi rend='italic'>The Quarterly Review</hi>, clxxii.
(1891) p. 195.</note> The custom of cutting the Maiden at harvest
was also observed in Inverness-shire and Sutherlandshire.<note place='foot'>As to Inverness-shire my old friend
Mr. Hugh E. Cameron, formerly of
Glen Moriston, Inverness-shire, wrote
to me many years ago: <q>As a boy, I
remember the last bit of corn cut was
taken home, and neatly tied up with a
ribbon, and then stuck up on the wall
above the kitchen fire-place, and there
it often remained till the <q>maiden</q> of
the following year took its place.
There was no ceremony about it,
beyond often a struggle as to who
would get, or cut, the last sheaf to
select the <q>maiden</q> from</q> (<hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, vii. 1889, pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).
As to Sutherlandshire my mother was
told by a servant, Isabella Ross, that
in that county <q>they hang up the
<q>maiden</q> generally over the mantel-piece
(chimney-piece) till the next
harvest. They have always a kirn,
whipped cream, with often a ring in it,
and sometimes meal sprinkled over it.
The girls must all be dressed in lilac
prints, they all dance, and at twelve
o'clock they eat potatoes and herrings</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
bride.</note>
A somewhat maturer but still youthful age is assigned
to the corn-spirit by the appellations of Bride, Oats-bride,
and Wheat-bride, which in Germany are sometimes
bestowed both on the last sheaf and on the woman who binds
it.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>
(Berlin, 1868), p. 30.</note> At wheat-harvest near Müglitz, in Moravia, a small
portion of the wheat is left standing after all the rest has been
reaped. This remnant is then cut, amid the rejoicing of
the reapers, by a young girl who wears a wreath of wheaten
ears on her head and goes by the name of the Wheat-bride.
It is supposed that she will be a real bride that same year.<note place='foot'>W. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde
der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>
(Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), p. 327.</note>
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
In the upland valley of Alpach, in North Tyrol, the person
who brings the last sheaf into the granary is said to have
the Wheat-bride or the Rye-bride according to the crop,
and is received with great demonstrations of respect and
rejoicing. The people of the farm go out to meet him, bells
are rung, and refreshments offered to him on a tray.<note place='foot'>J. E. Waldfreund, <q>Volksgebräuche
und Aberglaube in Tirol und
dem Salzburger Gebirg,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>,
iii. (1855) p. 340.</note> In
Austrian Silesia a girl is chosen to be the Wheat-bride, and
much honour is paid to her at the harvest-festival.<note place='foot'>Th. Vernaleken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und
Bräuche des Volkes in Oesterreich</hi>
(Vienna, 1859), p. 310.</note> Near
Roslin and Stonehaven, in Scotland, the last handful of
corn cut <q>got the name of <q>the bride,</q> and she was placed
over the <foreign rend='italic'>bress</foreign> or chimney-piece; she had a ribbon tied
below her numerous <foreign rend='italic'>ears</foreign>, and another round her waist.</q><note place='foot'>Mr. R. Matheson, in <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) pp. 49, 50.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
Bride and
Bridegroom.</note>
Sometimes the idea implied by the name of Bride
is worked out more fully by representing the productive
powers of vegetation as bride and bridegroom. Thus
in the Vorharz an Oats-man and an Oats-woman, swathed
in straw, dance at the harvest feast.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>
(Berlin, 1868), p. 30.</note> In South Saxony
an Oats-bridegroom and an Oats-bride figure together at
the harvest celebration. The Oats-bridegroom is a man
completely wrapt in oats-straw; the Oats-bride is a man
dressed in woman's clothes, but not wrapt in straw.
They are drawn in a waggon to the ale-house, where
the dance takes place. At the beginning of the dance
the dancers pluck the bunches of oats one by one from the
Oats-bridegroom, while he struggles to keep them, till
at last he is completely stript of them and stands bare,
exposed to the laughter and jests of the company.<note place='foot'>E. Sommer, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</hi>
(Halle, 1846), pp. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In
Austrian Silesia the ceremony of <q>the Wheat-bride</q> is
celebrated by the young people at the end of the harvest.
The woman who bound the last sheaf plays the part of the
Wheat-bride, wearing the harvest-crown of wheat ears and
flowers on her head. Thus adorned, standing beside her
Bridegroom in a waggon and attended by bridesmaids, she
is drawn by a pair of oxen, in full imitation of a marriage
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
procession, to the tavern, where the dancing is kept up till
morning. Somewhat later in the season the wedding of the
Oats-bride is celebrated with the like rustic pomp. About
Neisse, in Silesia, an Oats-king and an Oats-queen, dressed
up quaintly as a bridal pair, are seated on a harrow and
drawn by oxen into the village.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; E. Peter,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</hi>
(Troppau, 1865-1867), ii.
269.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in
the double
form of the
Old Wife
and the
Maiden
simultaneously
at
harvest in
the Highlands
of
Scotland.</note>
In these last instances the corn-spirit is personified in
double form as male and female. But sometimes the spirit
appears in a double female form as both old and young,
corresponding exactly to the Greek Demeter and Persephone,
if my interpretation of these goddesses is right. We have
seen that in Scotland, especially among the Gaelic-speaking
population, the last corn cut is sometimes called the Old
Wife and sometimes the Maiden. Now there are parts
of Scotland in which both an Old Wife (<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>) and a
Maiden are cut at harvest. As the accounts of this
custom are not quite clear and consistent, it may be well
to give them first in the words of the original authorities.
Thus the late Sheriff Alexander Nicolson tells us that
there is a Gaelic proverb, <q>A balk (<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>léum-iochd</foreign>) in autumn is
better than a sheaf the more</q>; and he explains it by saying
that a <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>léum-iochd</foreign> or balk <q>is a strip of a corn-field left
fallow. The fear of being left with the last sheaf of the
harvest, called the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>cailleach</foreign>, or <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>gobhar bhacach</foreign>, always led to
an exciting competition among the reapers in the last field.
The reaper who came on a <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>léum-iochd</foreign> would of course be
glad to have so much the less to cut.</q><note place='foot'>Alexander Nicolson, <hi rend='italic'>A Collection
of Gaelic Proverbs and Familiar
Phrases, based on Macintosh's Collection</hi>
(Edinburgh and London, 1881), p. 248.</note> In further explanation
of the proverb the writer adds:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The customs as to the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign> and <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Maighdean-bhuana</foreign>
seem to have varied somewhat. Two reapers were usually
set to each rig, and according to one account, the man who
was first done got the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Maighdean-bhuana</foreign> or <q>Reaping-Maiden,</q>
while the man who was last got the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign> or
<q>old woman.</q> The latter term is used in Argyleshire; the
term <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Gobhar-bhacach</foreign>, the lame goat, is used in Skye.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>According to what appears to be the better version, the
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
competition to avoid the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign> was not between reapers but
between neighbouring crofters, and the man who got his
harvest done first sent a handful of corn called the <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>
to his neighbour, who passed it on, till it landed with him
who was latest. That man's penalty was to provide for the
dearth of the township, <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>gort a' bhaile</foreign>, in the ensuing season.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Maighdean-bhuana</foreign>, again, was the last cut handful
of oats, on a croft or farm, and was an object of lively
competition among the reapers. It was tastefully tied
up with ribbons, generally dressed like a doll, and then
hung up on a nail till spring. On the first day of ploughing
it was solemnly taken down, and given as a <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Sainnseal</foreign>
(or handsel) to the horses for luck. It was meant as a symbol
that the harvest had been secured, and to ward off the
fairies, representatives of the ethereal and unsubstantial, till
the time came to provide for a new crop.</q><note place='foot'>A. Nicolson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 415 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the
Rev. Mr. Campbell of Kilchrenan, on Loch Awe, furnished Dr.
R. C. Maclagan with the following account of the Highland
customs at harvest. The recollections of Mrs. MacCorquodale,
then resident at Kilchrenan, refer to the customs practised
about the middle of the nineteenth century in the wild
and gloomy valley of Glencoe, infamous in history for
the treacherous massacre perpetrated there by the Government
troops in 1692. <q rend='pre'>Mrs. MacCorquodale says that
the rivalry was for the Maiden, and for the privilege she
gave of sending the Cailleach to the next neighbour.
The Maiden was represented by the last stalks reaped;
the Cailleach by a handful taken at random from the
field, perhaps the last rig of the reaper last to finish. The
Cailleach was not dressed but carried after binding to
the neighbour's field. The Maiden was cut in the following
manner. All the reapers gathered round her and kept a
short distance from her. They then threw their hooks
[sickles] at her. The person successful in cutting her down
in this manner was the man whose possession she became.
Mrs. MacCorquodale understood that the man of a township
who got the Cailleach finally was supposed to be doomed to
poverty for his want of energy. (Gaelic: <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>treubhantas</foreign>&mdash;valour.)</q>
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A sample of the toast to the Cailleach at the harvest
entertainment was as follows: <q>The Cailleach is with ...
and is now with (me) since I was the last. I drink to her
health. Since she assisted me in harvest, it is likely that it
is with me she will abide during the winter.</q> In explaining
the above toast Mr. Campbell says that it signifies that the
Cailleach is always with agriculturists. <q>She has been with
others before and is now with me (the proposer of the toast).
Though I did my best to avoid her I welcome her as my
assistant, and am prepared to entertain her during the winter.</q>
Another form of the toast was as follows: <q>To your health,
good wife, who for harvest has come to help us, and if I live
I'll try to support you when winter comes.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>John MacCorquodale, Kilchrenan, says that at Crianlarich
in Strath Fillan, they make a Cailleach of sticks and
a turnip, old clothes and a pipe. In this case the effigy
passed in succession to seven farms, which he mentioned, and
finally settled with an innkeeper. The list suggested that
the upper farms stood a bad chance, and perhaps that a
prosperous innkeeper could more easily bear up against the
reproach and loss (?) of supporting the Cailleach.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Duncan MacIntyre, Kilchrenan, says that in one case
where the last field to be reaped was the most fertile land on
the farm, the corn first cut in it, which was taken near the edge,
was reserved to make a Cailleach, should the owner be so
happy as to be able to pass her on to his neighbour. The
last blades cut were generally in the middle or best part of
the field. These in any event became the Maiden.</q> Lastly,
Dr. Maclagan observes that <q>having directed the attention
of Miss Kerr, Port Charlotte, Islay, to the practice of having
two different bunches on the mainland of Argyle, she informs
me that in Islay and Kintyre the last handful is the Cailleach,
and they have no Maiden. The same is the custom in Bernara
and other parts of the Western Isles, while in Mull the
last handful is the Maiden, and they have no Cailleach. In
North Uist the habit still prevails of putting the Cailleach
over-night among the standing corn of lazy crofters.</q><note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, <q>Corn-maiden in Argyleshire,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vii. (1896)
pp. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In these
customs
the Old
Wife represents
the
old corn of
last year,
and the
Maiden the
new corn
of this
year.</note>
The general rule to which these various accounts point
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
seems to be that, where both a Maiden and an Old Wife
(<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>) are fashioned out of the reaped corn at harvest, the
Maiden is always made out of the last stalks left standing, and
is kept by the farmer on whose land it was cut; while the Old
Wife is made out of other stalks, sometimes out of the first
stalks cut, and is regularly passed on to a laggard farmer
who happens to be still reaping after his brisker neighbour
has cut all his corn. Thus while each farmer keeps his own
Maiden, as the embodiment of the young and fruitful spirit
of the corn, he passes on the Old Wife as soon as he can to
a neighbour, and so the old lady may make the round of all
the farms in the district before she finds a place in which to
lay her venerable head. The farmer with whom she finally
takes up her abode is of course the one who has been the last
of all the countryside to finish reaping his crops, and thus the
distinction of entertaining her is rather an invidious one.
Similarly we saw that in Pembrokeshire, where the last corn
cut is called, not the Maiden, but the Hag, she is passed on
hastily to a neighbour who is still at work in his fields and
who receives his aged visitor with anything but a transport
of joy. If the Old Wife represents the corn-spirit of the
past year, as she probably does wherever she is contrasted
with and opposed to a Maiden, it is natural enough that
her faded charms should have less attractions for the husbandman
than the buxom form of her daughter, who may
be expected to become in her turn the mother of the golden
grain when the revolving year has brought round another
autumn. The same desire to get rid of the effete Mother
of the Corn by palming her off on other people comes out
clearly in some of the customs observed at the close of
threshing, particularly in the practice of passing on a hideous
straw puppet to a neighbour farmer who is still threshing
his corn.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, where, however,
the corn-spirit is conceived as an
Old Man.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy of
the harvest
customs to
the spring
customs of
Europe.</note>
The harvest customs just described are strikingly analogous
to the spring customs which we reviewed in the first
part of this work. (1) As in the spring customs the tree-spirit
is represented both by a tree and by a person,<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 73 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> so in
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
the harvest customs the corn-spirit is represented both by
the last sheaf and by the person who cuts or binds or
threshes it. The equivalence of the person to the sheaf is
shewn by giving him or her the same name as the sheaf; by
wrapping him or her in it; and by the rule observed in
some places, that when the sheaf is called the Mother, it
must be made up into human shape by the oldest married
woman, but that when it is called the Maiden, it must be
cut by the youngest girl.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</note> Here the age of the personal
representative of the corn-spirit corresponds with that of the
supposed age of the corn-spirit, just as the human victims
offered by the Mexicans to promote the growth of the maize
varied with the age of the maize.<note place='foot'>See below, pp. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> For in the Mexican, as
in the European, custom the human beings were probably
representatives of the corn-spirit rather than victims offered
to it. (2) Again, the same fertilising influence which the
tree-spirit is supposed to exert over vegetation, cattle, and
even women<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> is ascribed to the corn-spirit. Thus, its supposed
influence on vegetation is shewn by the practice of
taking some of the grain of the last sheaf (in which the
corn-spirit is regularly supposed to be present), and scattering
it among the young corn in spring or mixing it with the
seed-corn.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</note> Its influence on animals is shewn by giving the
last sheaf to a mare in foal, to a cow in calf, and to horses
at the first ploughing.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>,
<ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</note> Lastly, its influence on women is
indicated by the custom of delivering the Mother-sheaf, made
into the likeness of a pregnant woman, to the farmer's wife;<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</note>
by the belief that the woman who binds the last sheaf will
have a child next year;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>. Compare A.
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen
aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. p.
185, § 516.</note> perhaps, too, by the idea that the
person who gets it will soon be married.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>; compare p. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The spring
and harvest
customs of
Europe are
parts of a
primitive
heathen
ritual.</note>
Plainly, therefore, these spring and harvest customs are
based on the same ancient modes of thought, and form parts
of the same primitive heathendom, which was doubtless
practised by our forefathers long before the dawn of history.
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
Amongst the marks of a primitive ritual we may note the
following:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marks of a
primitive
ritual.</note>
1. No special class of persons is set apart for the performance
of the rites; in other words, there are no priests.
The rites may be performed by any one, as occasion demands.
</p>

<p>
2. No special places are set apart for the performance
of the rites; in other words, there are no temples. The
rites may be performed anywhere, as occasion demands.
</p>

<p>
3. Spirits, not gods, are recognised. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) As distinguished
from gods, spirits are restricted in their operations
to definite departments of nature. Their names are general,
not proper. Their attributes are generic, rather than individual;
in other words, there is an indefinite number of
spirits of each class, and the individuals of a class are all
much alike; they have no definitely marked individuality;
no accepted traditions are current as to their origin, life,
adventures, and character. (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) On the other hand gods, as
distinguished from spirits, are not restricted to definite
departments of nature. It is true that there is generally
some one department over which they preside as their
special province; but they are not rigorously confined to it;
they can exert their power for good or evil in many other
spheres of nature and life. Again, they bear individual or
proper names, such as Demeter, Persephone, Dionysus; and
their individual characters and histories are fixed by current
myths and the representations of art.
</p>

<p>
4. The rites are magical rather than propitiatory.
In other words, the desired objects are attained, not by
propitiating the favour of divine beings through sacrifice,
prayer, and praise, but by ceremonies which, as I have already
explained,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> are believed to influence the course of nature
directly through a physical sympathy or resemblance between
the rite and the effect which it is the intention of the rite
to produce.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Reasons
for regarding
the spring and
harvest
customs of
modern
Europe as
a primitive
ritual.</note>
Judged by these tests, the spring and harvest customs of
our European peasantry deserve to rank as primitive. For
no special class of persons and no special places are set
exclusively apart for their performance; they may be performed
by any one, master or man, mistress or maid, boy or
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
girl; they are practised, not in temples or churches, but in
the woods and meadows, beside brooks, in barns, on harvest
fields and cottage floors. The supernatural beings whose
existence is taken for granted in them are spirits rather than
deities: their functions are limited to certain well-defined
departments of nature: their names are general, like the
Barley-mother, the Old Woman, the Maiden, not proper
names like Demeter, Persephone, Dionysus. Their generic
attributes are known, but their individual histories and
characters are not the subject of myths. For they exist in
classes rather than as individuals, and the members of each
class are indistinguishable. For example, every farm has its
Corn-mother, or its Old Woman, or its Maiden; but every
Corn-mother is much like every other Corn-mother, and so
with the Old Women and Maidens. Lastly, in these harvest,
as in the spring customs, the ritual is magical rather than
propitiatory. This is shewn by throwing the Corn-mother
into the river in order to secure rain and dew for the
crops;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>. The common
custom of wetting the last sheaf and
its bearer is no doubt also a rain-charm;
indeed the intention to procure
rain or make the corn grow is
sometimes avowed. See above, pp.
<ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>; <hi rend='italic'>Adonis,
Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp.
195-197.</note> by making the Old Woman heavy in order to get
a heavy crop next year;<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</note> by strewing grain from the last
sheaf amongst the young crops in spring;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</note> and by giving
the last sheaf to the cattle to make them thrive.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. The Corn-Mother in Many Lands.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Corn-mother in America.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Corn-mother in America.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Corn-mother
in
many
lands.</note>
European peoples, ancient and modern, have not been
singular in personifying the corn as a mother goddess. The
same simple idea has suggested itself to other agricultural
races in distant parts of the world, and has been applied by
them to other indigenous cereals than barley and wheat. If
Europe has its Wheat-mother and its Barley-mother,
America has its Maize-mother and the East Indies their
Rice-mother. These personifications I will now illustrate,
beginning with the American personification of the maize.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Maize-mother
among the
Peruvian
Indians.</note>
We have seen that among European peoples it is a common
custom to keep the plaited corn-stalks of the last sheaf, or the
puppet which is formed out of them, in the farm-house from
harvest to harvest.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>,
<ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>:
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
pp. 7, 26.</note> The intention no doubt is, or rather originally
was, by preserving the representative of the corn-spirit
to maintain the spirit itself in life and activity throughout
the year, in order that the corn may grow and the crops be
good. This interpretation of the custom is at all events rendered
highly probable by a similar custom observed by the
ancient Peruvians, and thus described by the old Spanish
historian Acosta:&mdash;<q>They take a certain portion of the most
fruitful of the maize that grows in their farms, the which
they put in a certain granary which they do call <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>,
with certain ceremonies, watching three nights; they put
this maize in the richest garments they have, and being
thus wrapped and dressed, they worship this <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>, and hold
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
it in great veneration, saying it is the mother of the maize of
their inheritances, and that by this means the maize augments
and is preserved. In this month [the sixth month, answering
to May] they make a particular sacrifice, and the witches
demand of this <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign> if it hath strength sufficient to continue
until the next year; and if it answers no, then they
carry this maize to the farm to burn, whence they brought
it, according to every man's power; then they make another
<foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>, with the same ceremonies, saying that they renew it,
to the end the seed of maize may not perish, and if it
answers that it hath force sufficient to last longer, they leave
it until the next year. This foolish vanity continueth to
this day, and it is very common amongst the Indians to
have these <foreign rend='italic'>Piruas</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>J. de Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral
History of the Indies</hi>, bk. v. ch. 28,
vol. ii. p. 374 (Hakluyt Society,
London, 1880). In quoting the passage
I have modernised the spelling.
The original Spanish text of Acosta's
work was reprinted in a convenient
form at Madrid in 1894. See vol. ii.
p. 117 of that edition.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Maize-mother,
the
Quinoa-mother,
the Coca-mother,
and the
Potato-mother
among the
Peruvian
Indians.</note>
In this description of the custom there seems to be
some error. Probably it was the dressed-up bunch of
maize, not the granary (<foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>), which was worshipped
by the Peruvians and regarded as the Mother of the
Maize. This is confirmed by what we know of the Peruvian
custom from another source. The Peruvians, we are told,
believed all useful plants to be animated by a divine being
who causes their growth. According to the particular plant,
these divine beings were called the Maize-mother (<foreign rend='italic'>Zara-mama</foreign>),
the Quinoa-mother (<foreign rend='italic'>Quinoa-mama</foreign>), the Coca-mother
(<foreign rend='italic'>Coca-mama</foreign>), and the Potato-mother (<foreign rend='italic'>Axo-mama</foreign>). Figures
of these divine mothers were made respectively of ears of
maize and leaves of the quinoa and coca plants; they were
dressed in women's clothes and worshipped. Thus the
Maize-mother was represented by a puppet made of stalks of
maize dressed in full female attire; and the Indians believed
that <q>as mother, it had the power of producing and giving
birth to much maize.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mannhardt's
authority is a Spanish tract
(<hi rend='italic'>Carta pastorale de exortacion e instruccion
contra las idolatrias de los Indios
del arçobispado de Lima</hi>) by Pedro de
Villagomez, Archbishop of Lima,
published at Lima in 1649, and communicated
to Mannhardt by J. J.
v. Tschudi. The <hi rend='italic'>Carta Pastorale</hi> itself
seems to be partly based on an earlier
work, the <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de la Idolatria
del Piru. Dirigido al Rey N.S. en
Su real conseio de Indias, por el Padre
Pablo Joseph de Arriaga de la Compañia
de Jesus</hi> (Lima, 1621). A copy
of this work is possessed by the British
Museum, where I consulted it. The
writer explains (p. 16) that the Maize-mothers
(<foreign rend='italic'>Zaramamas</foreign>) are of three
sorts, namely (1) those which are
made of maize stalks, dressed up like
women, (2) those which are carved of
stone in the likeness of cobs of maize,
and (3) those which consist simply of
fruitful stalks of maize or of two
maize-cobs naturally joined together.
These last, the writer tells us, were the
principal <foreign rend='italic'>Zaramamas</foreign>, and were revered
by the natives as Mothers of the Maize.
Similarly, when two potatoes were
found growing together the Indians
called them Potato-mothers (<foreign rend='italic'>Axomamas</foreign>)
and kept them in order to
get a good crop of potatoes. As
Arriaga's work is rare, it may be well
to give his account of the Maize-mothers,
Coca-mothers, and Potato-mothers
in his own words. He says
(p. 16): <q><foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Zaramamas, son de tres
maneras, y son las que se quentan entre
las cosas halladas en los pueblos. La
primera es una como muñeca hecha de
cañas de maiz, vestida como muger con
su anaco, y llicilla, y sus topos de
plata, y entienden, que como madre
tiene virtud de engendrar, y parir
mucho maiz. A este modo tienen
tambien Cocamamas para augmento de
la coca. Otras son de piedra labradas
como choclos, o mazorcas de maiz, con sus
granos relevados, y de estas suelen tener
muchas en lugar de Conopas</foreign> [household
gods]. <foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Otras son algunas cañas fertiles
de maiz, que con la fertilidad de la
tierra dieron muchas maçorcas, y
grandes, o quando salen dos maçorcas
juntas, y estas son las principales,
Zaramamas, y assi las reverencian
como a madres del maiz, a estas llaman
tambien Huantayzara, o Ayrihuayzara.
A este tercer genero no le dan la
adoracion que a Huaca, ni Conopa,
sino que le tienen supersticiosamente
como una cosa sagrada, y colgando
estas cañas con muchos choclos de unos
ramos de sauce bailen con ellas el bayle,
que llaman Ayrihua, y acabado el
bayle, las queman, y sacrifican a Libiac
para que les de buena cosecha. Con
la misma supersticion guardan las
mazorcas del maiz, que salen muy
pintadas, que llaman Micsazara, o
Mantayzara, o Caullazara, y otros que
llaman Piruazara, que son otras
maçorcas en que van subiendo los
granos no derechos sino haziendo
caracol. Estas Micsazara, o Piruazara,
ponen supersticiosamente en los
montones de maiz, y en las Piruas (que
son donde guardan el maiz) paraque se
las guarde, y el dia de las exhibiciones
se junta tanto de estas maçorcas, que
tienen bien que comer las mulas. La
misma supersticion tienen con las que
llaman Axomamas, que son quando
salen algunas papas juntas, y las
guardan para tener buena cosecha de
papas.</foreign></q> The <foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>exhibiciones</foreign> here referred
to are the occasions when the Indians
brought forth their idols and other
relics of superstition and delivered
them to the ecclesiastical visitors.
At Tarija in Bolivia, down to the
present time, a cross is set up at
harvest in the maize-fields, and on it
all maize-spadices growing as twins
are hung. They are called Pachamamas
(Earth-mothers) and are thought
to bring good harvests. See Baron
E. Nordenskiöld, <q>Travels on the
Boundaries of Bolivia and Argentina,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>The Geographical Journal</hi>, xxi. (1903)
pp. 517, 518. Compare E. J. Payne,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the New World called
America</hi> (Oxford, 1892), i. 414 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Probably, therefore, Acosta misunderstood
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
his informant, and the Mother of the Maize which
he describes was not the granary (<foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>), but the bunch of
maize dressed in rich vestments. The Peruvian Mother of
the Maize, like the harvest-Maiden at Balquhidder, was kept
for a year in order that by her means the corn might grow
and multiply. But lest her strength might not suffice to last
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
till the next harvest, she was asked in the course of the
year how she felt, and if she answered that she felt weak, she
was burned and a fresh Mother of the Maize made, <q>to the
end the seed of maize may not perish.</q> Here, it may be
observed, we have a strong confirmation of the explanation
already given of the custom of killing the god, both periodically
and occasionally. The Mother of the Maize was
allowed, as a rule, to live through a year, that being the
period during which her strength might reasonably be supposed
to last unimpaired; but on any symptom of her
strength failing she was put to death, and a fresh and vigorous
Mother of the Maize took her place, lest the maize which
depended on her for its existence should languish and decay.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Customs of
the ancient
Mexicans
at the
maize-harvest.</note>
Hardly less clearly does the same train of thought come
out in the harvest customs formerly observed by the Zapotecs
of Mexico. At harvest the priests, attended by the nobles
and people, went in procession to the maize fields, where they
picked out the largest and finest sheaf. This they took
with great ceremony to the town or village, and placed it in
the temple upon an altar adorned with wild flowers. After
sacrificing to the harvest god, the priests carefully wrapped
up the sheaf in fine linen and kept it till seed-time. Then
the priests and nobles met again at the temple, one of them
bringing the skin of a wild beast, elaborately ornamented, in
which the linen cloth containing the sheaf was enveloped.
The sheaf was then carried once more in procession to the
field from which it had been taken. Here a small cavity or
subterranean chamber had been prepared, in which the
precious sheaf was deposited, wrapt in its various envelopes.
After sacrifice had been offered to the gods of the fields for
an abundant crop the chamber was closed and covered over
with earth. Immediately thereafter the sowing began.
Finally, when the time of harvest drew near, the buried sheaf
was solemnly disinterred by the priests, who distributed the
grain to all who asked for it. The packets of grain so distributed
were carefully preserved as talismans till the harvest.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique Centrale</hi> (Paris 1857-1859),
iii. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iii.
505 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
New World called America</hi>, i. 419 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In these ceremonies, which continued to be annually celebrated
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
long after the Spanish conquest, the intention of keeping
the finest sheaf buried in the maize field from seed-time
to harvest was undoubtedly to quicken the growth of the
maize.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sahagun's
account of
the ancient
Mexican
religion.</note>
A fuller and to some extent different account of the
ancient Mexican worship of the maize has been given us
by the Franciscan monk Bernardino de Sahagun, who arrived
in Mexico in 1529, only eight years after its conquest by
the Spaniards, and devoted the remaining sixty-one years
of his long life to labouring among the Indians for their
moral and spiritual good. Uniting the curiosity of a
scientific enquirer to the zeal of a missionary, and adorning
both qualities with the humanity and benevolence of a
good man, he obtained from the oldest and most learned
of the Indians accounts of their ancient customs and beliefs,
and embodied them in a work which, for combined interest
of matter and fulness of detail, has perhaps never been
equalled in the records of aboriginal peoples brought into
contact with European civilisation. This great document,
after lying neglected in the dust of Spanish archives for centuries,
was discovered and published almost simultaneously
in Mexico and England in the first half of the nineteenth
century. It exists in the double form of an Aztec text and
a Spanish translation, both due to Sahagun himself. Only
the Spanish version has hitherto been published in full, but
the original Aztec text, to judge by the few extracts of it
which have been edited and translated, appears to furnish
much more ample details on many points, and in the interest
of learning it is greatly to be desired that a complete edition
and translation of it should be given to the world.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sahagun's
description
of the
Mexican
Maize-goddess
and her
festival.</note>
Fortunately, among the sections of this great work which
have been edited and translated from the Aztec original into
German by Professor Eduard Seler of Berlin is a long one
describing the religious festivals of the ancient Mexican
calendar.<note place='foot'>E. Seler, <q>Altmexikanische
Studien, ii.,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen aus
dem königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde</hi>,
vi. (Berlin, 1899) 2/4 Heft,
pp. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Another chapter of
Sahagun's work, describing the costumes
of the Mexican gods, has been edited
and translated into German by Professor
E. Seler in the same series
of publications (<q>Altmexikanische
Studien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen aus dem
königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde</hi>,
i. 4 (Berlin, 1890) pp. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).
Sahagun's work as a whole is known
to me only in the excellent French
translation of Messrs. D. Jourdanet
and R. Simeon (<hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale des
choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne par le
R. P. Fray Bernardino de Sahagun</hi>,
Paris, 1880). As to the life and
character of Sahagun see M. R.
Simeon's introduction to the translation,
pp. vii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> From it we learn some valuable particulars as to
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
the worship of the Maize-goddess and the ceremonies observed
by the Mexicans for the purpose of ensuring a good crop
of maize. The festival was the fourth of the Aztec year,
and went by the name of the Great Vigil. It fell on a date
which corresponds to the seventh of April. The name of
the Maize-goddess was Chicome couatl, and the Mexicans
conceived and represented her in the form of a woman, red
in face and arms and legs, wearing a paper crown dyed
vermilion, and clad in garments of the hue of ripe cherries.
No doubt the red colour of the goddess and her garments
referred to the deep orange hue of the ripe maize; it was
like the yellow hair of the Greek corn-goddess Demeter.
She was supposed to make all kinds of maize, beans, and
vegetables to grow. On the day of the festival the Mexicans
sent out to the maize-fields and fetched from every field
a plant of maize, which they brought to their houses and
greeted as their maize-gods, setting them up in their
dwellings, clothing them in garments, and placing food
before them. And after sunset they carried the maize-plants
to the temple of the Maize-goddess, where they
snatched them from one another and fought and struck
each other with them. Further, at this festival they brought
to the temple of the Maize-goddess the maize-cobs which
were to be used in the sowing. The cobs were carried by
three maidens in bundles of seven wrapt in red paper. One
of the girls was small with short hair, another was older
with long hair hanging down, and the third was full-grown
with her hair wound round her head. Red feathers were
gummed to the arms and legs of the three maidens and
their faces were painted, probably to resemble the red
Maize-goddess, whom they may be supposed to have
personated at various stages of the growth of the corn.
The maize-cobs which they brought to the temple of the
Maize-goddess were called by the name of the Maize-god
Cinteotl, and they were afterwards deposited in the granary
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
and kept there as <q>the heart of the granary</q> till the sowing
time came round, when they were used as seed.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, Aztec text of book
ii., translated by Professor E. Seler,
<q>Altmexikanische Studien, ii.,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Veröffentlichungen aus dem königlichen
Museum für Völkerkunde</hi>, vi. 2/4 Heft
(Berlin, 1899), pp. 188-194. The
account of the ceremonies given in the
Spanish version of Sahagun's work is a
good deal more summary. See B. de
Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale des choses
de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi> (Paris, 1880),
pp. 94-96.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Corn-mother
among the
North
American
Indians.</note>
The eastern Indians of North America, who subsisted
to a large extent by the cultivation of maize, generally
conceived the spirit of the maize as a woman, and supposed
that the plant itself had sprung originally from the blood
drops or the dead body of the Corn Woman. In the sacred
formulas of the Cherokee the corn is sometimes invoked as
<q>the Old Woman,</q> and one of their myths relates how a
hunter saw a fair woman issue from a single green stalk of
corn.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part I. (Washington, 1900) pp. 423,
432. See further <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,
Second Edition, pp. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Iroquois believe the Spirit of the Corn, the
Spirit of Beans, and the Spirit of Squashes to be three
sisters clad in the leaves of their respective plants, very fond
of each other, and delighting to dwell together. This divine
trinity is known by the name of <foreign rend='italic'>De-o-ha'-ko</foreign>, which means
<q>Our Life</q> or <q>Our Supporters.</q> The three persons of
the trinity have no individual names, and are never
mentioned separately except by means of description. The
Indians have a legend that of old the corn was easily
cultivated, yielded abundantly, and had a grain exceedingly
rich in oil, till the Evil One, envious of this good gift of
the Great Spirit to man, went forth into the fields and
blighted them. And still, when the wind rustles in the
corn, the pious Indian fancies he hears the Spirit of the
Corn bemoaning her blighted fruitfulness.<note place='foot'>L. H. Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>League of the
Iroquois</hi> (Rochester, 1851), pp. 161
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 199. According to the Iroquois
the corn plant sprang from the bosom
of the mother of the Great Spirit after
her burial (L. H. Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 199 note 1).</note> The Huichol
Indians of Mexico imagine maize to be a little girl, who
may sometimes be heard weeping in the fields; so afraid
is she of the wild beasts that eat the corn.<note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), ii. 280.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Mother-cotton in the Punjaub.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Mother-cotton in the Punjaub.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Mother-cotton
in
the
Punjaub.</note>
In the Punjaub, to the east of the Jumna, when the
cotton boles begin to burst, it is usual to select the largest
plant in the field, sprinkle it with butter-milk and rice-water,
and then bind to it pieces of cotton taken from the other
plants of the field. This selected plant is called Sirdar or
<foreign rend='italic'>Bhogaldaí</foreign>, that is <q>mother-cotton,</q> from <foreign rend='italic'>bhogla</foreign>, a name
sometimes given to a large cotton-pod, and <foreign rend='italic'>daí</foreign> (for <foreign rend='italic'>daiya</foreign>),
<q>a mother,</q> and after it has been saluted, prayers are
offered that the other plants may resemble it in the richness
of their produce.<note place='foot'>H. M. Elliot, <hi rend='italic'>Supplemental Glossary
of Terms used in the North-Western
Provinces</hi>, edited by J. Beames
(London, 1869), i. 254.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Barley Bride among the Berbers.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Barley Bride among the Berbers.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Barley
Bride
among the
Berbers.</note>
The conception of the corn-spirit as a bride seems
to come out clearly in a ceremony still practised by
the Berbers near Tangier, in Morocco. When the women
assemble in the fields to weed the green barley or reap the
crops, they take with them a straw figure dressed like a
woman, and set it up among the corn. Suddenly a group of
horsemen from a neighbouring village gallops up and carries
off the straw puppet amid the screams and cries of the women.
However, the ravished effigy is rescued by another band of
mounted men, and after a struggle it remains, more or less
dishevelled, in the hands of the women. That this pretended
abduction is a mimic marriage appears from a Berber
custom in accordance with which, at a real wedding, the
bridegroom carries off his seemingly unwilling bride on horseback,
while she screams and pretends to summon her friends
to her rescue. No fixed date is appointed for the simulated
abduction of the straw woman from the barley-field, the time
depends upon the state of the crops, but the day and hour
are made public before the event. Each village used to practise
this mimic contest for possession of the straw woman,
who probably represents the Barley Bride, but nowadays the
custom is growing obsolete.<note place='foot'>W. B. Harris, <q>The Berbers of
Morocco,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxvii. (1898) p.
68.</note>
</p>

<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Another
account of
the Barley
Bride
among the
Berbers.
Competitions
for
the possession
of
the image
that represents
the
Corn-mother.</note>
An earlier account of what seems to be the same practice
runs as follows: <q>There is a curious custom which seems to
be a relic of their pagan masters, who made this and the
adjoining regions of North Africa the main granary of their
Latin empire. When the young corn has sprung up, which
it does about the middle of February, the women of the
villages make up the figure of a female, the size of a very
large doll, which they dress in the gaudiest fashion they can
contrive, covering it with ornaments to which all in the
village contribute something; and they give it a tall, peaked
head-dress. This image they carry in procession round
their fields, screaming and singing a peculiar ditty. The
doll is borne by the foremost woman, who must yield it to
any one who is quick enough to take the lead of her, which
is the cause of much racing and squabbling. The men also
have a similar custom, which they perform on horseback.
They call the image Mata. These ceremonies are said by
the people to bring good luck. Their efficacy ought to be
great, for you frequently see crowds of men engaged in
their performances running and galloping recklessly over the
young crops of wheat and barley. Such customs are
directly opposed to the faith of Islam, and I never met with
a Moor who could in any way enlighten me as to their
origin. The Berber tribes, the most ancient race now
remaining in these regions, to which they give the name, are
the only ones which retain this antique usage, and it is
viewed by the Arabs and dwellers in the town as a remnant
of idolatry.</q><note place='foot'>Sir John Drummond Hay, <hi rend='italic'>Western
Barbary, its Wild Tribes and Savage
Animals</hi> (1844), p. 9, quoted in <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
vii. (1896) pp. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We may conjecture that this gaudily dressed
effigy of a female, which the Berber women carry about
their fields when the corn is sprouting, represents the Corn-mother,
and that the procession is designed to promote the
growth of the crops by imparting to them the quickening
influence of the goddess. We can therefore understand why
there should be a competition among the women for the
possession of the effigy; each woman probably hopes to
secure for herself and her crops a larger measure of fertility
by appropriating the image of the Corn-mother. The
competition on horseback among the men is no doubt to be
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
explained similarly; they, too, race with each other in their
eagerness to possess themselves of an effigy, perhaps of a
male power of the corn, by whose help they expect to procure
a heavy crop. Such contests for possession of the
corn-spirit embodied in the corn-stalks are common, as we
have seen, among the reapers on the harvest fields of
Europe. Perhaps they help to explain some of the contests
in the Eleusinian games, among which horse-races as well as
foot-races were included.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. The Rice-mother in the East Indies.'/>
<head>§ 4. The Rice-mother in the East Indies.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Comparison
of the
European
ritual of
the corn
with the
Indonesian
ritual of
the rice.</note>
If the reader still feels any doubts as to the meaning
of the harvest customs which have been practised within
living memory by European peasants, these doubts may
perhaps be dispelled by comparing the customs observed at
the rice-harvest by the Malays and Dyaks of the East Indies.
For these Eastern peoples have not, like our peasantry,
advanced beyond the intellectual stage at which the customs
originated; their theory and their practice are still in
unison; for them the quaint rites which in Europe have
long dwindled into mere fossils, the pastime of clowns and
the puzzle of the learned, are still living realities of which
they can render an intelligible and truthful account. Hence
a study of their beliefs and usages concerning the rice may
throw some light on the true meaning of the ritual of the
corn in ancient Greece and modern Europe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Indonesian
ritual of
the rice is
based on
the belief
that the
rice is
animated
by a soul.</note>
Now the whole of the ritual which the Malays and
Dyaks observe in connexion with the rice is founded on the
simple conception of the rice as animated by a soul like
that which these people attribute to mankind. They explain
the phenomena of reproduction, growth, decay and death in
the rice on the same principles on which they explain the
corresponding phenomena in human beings. They imagine
that in the fibres of the plant, as in the body of a man,
there is a certain vital element, which is so far independent
of the plant that it may for a time be completely separated
from it without fatal effects, though if its absence be
prolonged beyond certain limits the plant will wither and
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
die. This vital yet separable element is what, for the want
of a better word, we must call the soul of a plant, just as a
similar vital and separable element is commonly supposed
to constitute the soul of man; and on this theory or myth
of the plant-soul is built the whole worship of the cereals,
just as on the theory or myth of the human soul is built
the whole worship of the dead,&mdash;a towering superstructure
reared on a slender and precarious foundation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Parallelism
between
the human
soul and
the rice-soul.</note>
The strict parallelism between the Indonesian ideas
about the soul of man and the soul of rice is well brought
out by Mr. R. J. Wilkinson in the following passage: <q>The
spirit of life,&mdash;which, according to the ancient Indonesian
belief, existed in all things, even in what we should now
consider inanimate objects&mdash;is known as the <foreign rend='italic'>sĕmangat</foreign>. It
was not a <q>soul</q> in the modern English sense, since it was
not the exclusive possession of mankind, its separation from
the body did not necessarily mean death, and its nature may
possibly not have been considered immortal. At the present
day, if a Malay feels faint, he will describe his condition by
saying that his <q>spirit of life</q> is weak or is <q>flying</q> from his
body; he sometimes appeals to it to return: <q>Hither, hither,
bird of my soul.</q> Or again, if a Malay lover wishes to
influence the mind of a girl, he may seek to obtain control
of her <foreign rend='italic'>sĕmangat</foreign>, for he believes that this spirit of active and
vigorous life must quit the body when the body sleeps and
so be liable to capture by the use of magic arts. It is,
however, in the ceremonies connected with the so-called
<q>spirit of the rice-crops</q> that the peculiar characteristics of
the <foreign rend='italic'>sĕmangat</foreign> come out most clearly. The Malay considers
it essential that the spirit of life should not depart from the
rice intended for next year's sowing as otherwise the dead
seed would fail to produce any crop whatever. He, therefore,
approaches the standing rice-crops at harvest-time in a
deprecatory manner; he addresses them in endearing terms;
he offers propitiatory sacrifices; he fears that he may scare
away the timorous <q>bird of life</q> by the sight of a weapon or
the least sign of violence. He must reap the seed-rice, but
he does it with a knife of peculiar shape, such that the cruel
blade is hidden away beneath the reaper's fingers and does
not alarm the <q>soul of the rice.</q> When once the seed-rice
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
has been harvested, more expeditious reaping-tools may be
employed, since it is clearly unnecessary to retain the spirit
of life in grain that is only intended for the cooking-pot.
Similar rites attend all the processes of rice-cultivation&mdash;the
sowing and the planting-out as well as the harvest,&mdash;for at
each of these stages there is a risk that the vitality of the
crop may be ruined if the bird of life is scared away. In
the language used by the high-priests of these very ancient
ceremonies we constantly find references to Sri (the Hindu
Goddess of the Crops), to the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge,
and to Adam who, according to Moslem tradition, was the
first planter of cereals;&mdash;many of these references only
represent the attempts of the conservative Malays to make
their old religions harmonize with later beliefs. Beneath
successive layers of religious veneer, we see the animism of
the old Indonesians, the theory of a bird-spirit of life, and
the characteristic view that the best protection against evil
lies in gentleness and courtesy to all animate and inanimate
things.</q><note place='foot'>R. J. Wilkinson (of the Civil Service
of the Federated Malay States),
<hi rend='italic'>Malay Beliefs</hi> (London and Leyden,
1906), pp. 49-51. On the conception
of the soul as a bird, see <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the
Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The
Toradjas of Central Celebes think that
the soul of the rice is embodied in a
pretty little blue bird, which builds its
nest in the rice-field when the ears are
forming and vanishes after harvest.
Hence no one may drive away, much
less kill, these birds; to do so would
not only injure the crop, the sacrilegious
wretch himself would suffer from sickness,
which might end in blindness.
See A. C. Kruyt, <q>De Rijstmoeder
in den Indischen Archipel,</q> p. 374
(see the full reference in the next
note).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The soul-stuff
of
rice.</note>
<q>It is a familiar fact,</q> says another eminent authority on
the East Indies, <q>that the Indonesian imagines rice to be
animated, to be provided with <q>soul-stuff.</q> Since rice is
everywhere cultivated in the Indian Archipelago, and
with some exceptions is the staple food, we need not
wonder that the Indonesian conceives the rice to be not
merely animated in the ordinary sense but to be possessed
of a soul-stuff which in strength and dignity ranks with that
of man. Thus the Bataks apply the same word <foreign rend='italic'>tondi</foreign> to
the soul-stuff of rice and the soul-stuff of human beings.
Whereas the Dyaks of Poelopetak give the name of <foreign rend='italic'>gana</foreign> to
the soul-stuff of things, animals, and plants, they give the
name of <foreign rend='italic'>hambaruan</foreign> to the soul-stuff of rice as well as of
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
man. So also the inhabitants of Halmahera call the soul-stuff
of things and plants <foreign rend='italic'>giki</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>duhutu</foreign>, but in men and
food they recognise a <foreign rend='italic'>gurumi</foreign>. Of the Javanese, Malays,
Macassars, Buginese, and the inhabitants of the island of
Buru we know that they ascribe a <foreign rend='italic'>sumangè</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>sumangat</foreign>, or
<foreign rend='italic'>sĕmangat</foreign> to rice as well as to men. So it is with the
Toradjas of Central Celebes; while they manifestly conceive
all things and plants as animated, they attribute a <foreign rend='italic'>tanoana</foreign>
or soul-stuff only to men, animals, and rice. It need hardly
be said that this custom originates in the very high value
that is set on rice.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Kruyt, <q>De Rijstmoeder in
den Indischen Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en
Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie
van Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
Vierde Reeks, v. part 4 (Amsterdam,
1903), pp. 361 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> This
essay (pp. 361-411) contains a valuable
collection of facts relating to what the
writer calls the Rice-mother in the
East Indies. But it is to be observed
that while all the Indonesian peoples
seem to treat a certain portion of the
rice at harvest with superstitious respect
and ceremony, only a part of them
actually call it <q>the Rice-mother.</q>
Mr. Kruyt prefers to speak of <q>soul-stuff</q>
rather than of <q>a soul,</q> because,
according to him, in living beings the
animating principle is conceived, not
as a tiny being confined to a single
part of the body, but as a sort of fluid
or ether diffused through every part of
the body. See his work, <hi rend='italic'>Het Animisme
in den Indischen Archipel</hi> (The
Hague, 1906), pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In the
latter work (pp. 145-150) the writer
gives a more summary account of the
Indonesian theory of the rice-soul.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rice
treated
by the Indonesians
as if it
were a
woman.</note>
Believing the rice to be animated by a soul like that
of a man, the Indonesians naturally treat it with the
deference and the consideration which they shew to their
fellows. Thus they behave towards the rice in bloom as
they behave towards a pregnant woman; they abstain from
firing guns or making loud noises in the field, lest they
should so frighten the soul of the rice that it would miscarry
and bear no grain; and for the same reason they will
not talk of corpses or demons in the rice-fields. Moreover,
they feed the blooming rice with foods of various kinds
which are believed to be wholesome for women with child;
but when the rice-ears are just beginning to form, they are
looked upon as infants, and women go through the fields
feeding them with rice-pap as if they were human babes.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. C. Kruyt,
<q>De Rijstmoeder,</q> <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 363 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
370 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
In such natural and obvious comparisons of the breeding
plant to a breeding woman, and of the young grain to a
young child, is to be sought the origin of the kindred Greek
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
conception of the Corn-mother and the Corn-daughter,
Demeter and Persephone, and we need not go further afield
to search for it in a primitive division of labour between the
sexes.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But if the timorous feminine soul of the rice can be
frightened into a miscarriage even by loud noises, it is easy
to imagine what her feelings must be at harvest, when
people are under the sad necessity of cutting down the rice
with the knife. At so critical a season every precaution
must be used to render the necessary surgical operation of
reaping as inconspicuous and as painless as possible. For
that reason, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</note> the reaping of the seed-rice is
done with knives of a peculiar pattern, such that the blades
are hidden in the reapers' hands and do not frighten the rice-spirit
till the very last moment, when her head is swept off
almost before she is aware; and from a like delicate motive
the reapers at work in the fields employ a special form of
speech, which the rice-spirit cannot be expected to understand,
so that she has no warning or inkling of what is
going forward till the heads of rice are safely deposited in
the basket.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, pp. 411 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. C. Kruyt, <q>De
Rijstmoeder,</q> <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 372.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Kayans
of Borneo,
their treatment
of
the soul of
the rice.</note>
Among the Indonesian peoples who thus personify the
rice we may take the Kayans or Bahaus of Central Borneo as
typical. As we have already seen, they are essentially an
agricultural people devoted to the cultivation of rice, which
furnishes their staple food; their religion is deeply coloured
by this main occupation of their lives, and it presents many
analogies to the Eleusinian worship of the corn-goddesses
Demeter and Persephone.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> And just as the Greeks regarded
corn as a gift of the goddess Demeter, so the Kayans
believe that rice, maize, sweet potatoes, tobacco, and all the
other products of the earth which they cultivate, were
originally created for their benefit by the spirits.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Instruments
used
by the
Kayans for
the purpose
of
catching
and detaining
the
soul of
the rice.
Ceremonies
performed
by Kayan
housewives
at fetching
rice from
the barn.</note>
In order to secure and detain the volatile soul of the
rice the Kayans resort to a number of devices. Among the
instruments employed for this purpose are a miniature
ladder, a spatula, and a basket containing hooks, thorns, and
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
cords. With the spatula the priestess strokes the soul of
the rice down the little ladder into the basket, where it is
naturally held fast by the hooks, the thorn, and the cord;
and having thus captured and imprisoned the soul she
conveys it into the rice-granary. Sometimes a bamboo box
and a net are used for the same purpose. And in order to
ensure a good harvest for the following year it is necessary
not only to detain the soul of all the grains of rice which
are safely stored in the granary, but also to attract and
recover the soul of all the rice that has been lost through
falling to the earth or being eaten by deer, apes, and pigs.
For this purpose instruments of various sorts have been
invented by the priests. One, for example, is a bamboo
vessel provided with four hooks made from the wood of a
fruit-tree, by means of which the absent rice-soul may be
hooked and drawn back into the vessel, which is then hung
up in the house. Sometimes two hands carved out of the
wood of a fruit-tree are used for the same purpose. And
every time that a Kayan housewife fetches rice from the
granary for the use of her household, she must propitiate
the souls of the rice in the granary, lest they should be
angry at being robbed of their substance. To keep them
in good humour a bundle of shavings of a fruit-tree and
a little basket are always hung in the granary. An egg
and a small vessel containing the juice of sugar-cane are
attached as offerings to the bundle of shavings, and the
basket contains a sacred mat, which is used at fetching the
rice. When the housewife comes to fetch rice from the
granary, she pours juice of the sugar-cane on the egg, takes
the sacred mat from the basket, spreads it on the ground,
lays a stalk of rice on it, and explains to the souls of the
rice the object of her coming. Then she kneels before the
mat, mutters some prayers or spells, eats a single grain from
the rice-stalk, and having restored the various objects to
their proper place, departs from the granary with the
requisite amount of rice, satisfied that she has discharged
her religious duty to the spirits of the rice. At harvest the
spirits of the rice are propitiated with offerings of food and
water, which are carried by children to the rice-fields. At
evening the first rice-stalks which have been cut are solemnly
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
brought home in a consecrated basket to the beating of a
gong, and all cats and dogs are driven from the house before
the basket with its precious contents is brought in.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
118-121. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>In Centraal
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1900), i. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Masquerade
performed
by the
Kayans
before
sowing for
the purpose
of attracting
the
soul of
the rice.</note>
Among the Kayans of the Mahakam river in Central
Borneo the sowing of the rice is immediately preceded by a
performance of masked men, which is intended to attract the
soul or rather souls of the rice and so to make sure that the
harvest will be a good one. The performers represent
spirits; for, believing that spirits are mightier than men,
the Kayans imagine that they can acquire and exert superhuman
power by imitating the form and actions of spirits.<note place='foot'>A similar belief probably explains
the masked dances and pantomimes of
many savage tribes. If that is so, it
shews how deeply the principle of
imitative magic has influenced savage
religion.</note>
To support their assumed character they wear grotesque masks
with goggle eyes, great teeth, huge ears, and beards of white
goat's hair, while their bodies are so thickly wrapt up in
shredded banana-leaves that to the spectator they present
the appearance of unwieldy masses of green foliage. The
leader of the band carries a long wooden hook or rather
crook, the shaft of which is partly whittled into loose
fluttering shavings. These disguises they don at a
little distance from the village, then dropping down the
river in boats they land and march in procession to an open
space among the houses, where the people, dressed out in all
their finery, are waiting to witness the performance. Here
the maskers range themselves in a circle and dance for some
time under the burning rays of the midday sun, waving their
arms, shaking and turning their heads, and executing a
variety of steps to the sound of a gong, which is beaten
according to a rigidly prescribed rhythm. After the dance
they form a line, one behind the other, to fetch the vagrant
soul of the rice from far countries. At the head of the
procession marches the leader holding high his crook and
behind him follow all the other masked men in their leafy
costume, each holding his fellow by the hand. As he
strides along, the leader makes a motion with his crook
as if he were hooking something and drawing it to himself,
and the gesture is imitated by all his followers. What
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
he is thus catching are the souls of the rice, which
sometimes wander far away, and by drawing them home
to the village he is believed to ensure that the seed of
the rice which is about to be sown will produce a plentiful
harvest. As the spirits are thought not to possess the
power of speech, the actors who personate them may not
utter a word, else they would run the risk of falling down
dead. The great field of the chief is sown by representatives
of all the families, both free and slaves, on the
day after the masquerade. On the same day the free
families sacrifice on their fields and begin their sowing on
one or other of the following days. Every family sets up
in its field a sacrificial stage or altar, with which the sowers
must remain in connexion during the time of sowing.
Therefore no stranger may pass between them and the
stage; indeed the Kayans are not allowed to have anything
to do with strangers in the fields; above all they may not
speak with them. If such a thing should accidentally happen,
the sowing must cease for that day. At the sowing festival,
but at no other time, Kayan men of the Mahakam river, like
their brethren of the Mendalam river, amuse themselves
with spinning tops. For nine days before the masquerade
takes place the people are bound to observe certain taboos:
no stranger may enter the village: no villager may pass the
night out of his own house: they may not hunt, nor pluck
fruits, nor fish with the casting-net or the drag-net.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi>, i. 322-330. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>In
Centraal Borneo</hi>, i. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the
masquerades performed and the taboos
observed at the sowing season by the
Kayans of the Mendalam river, see
above, pp. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In this
tribe the proper day for sowing is officially determined by
a priest from an observation of the sun setting behind the
hills in a line with two stones which the priest has set up,
one behind the other. However, the official day often does
not coincide with the actual day of sowing.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 317.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Comparison
of the
Kayan
masquerade
with
the
Eleusinian
drama.</note>
The masquerade thus performed by the Kayans of the
Mahakam river before sowing the rice is an instructive
example of a religious or rather magical drama acted for
the express purpose of ensuring a good crop. As such it
may be compared to the drama of Demeter and Persephone,
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
the Corn-mother and the Corn-maiden, which was annually
played at the Eleusinian mysteries shortly before the
autumnal sowing of the corn. If my interpretation of these
mysteries is correct, the intention of the Greek and of the
Kayan drama was one and the same.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Securing
the soul of
the rice
among the
Dyaks of
Northern
Borneo.</note>
At harvest the Dyaks of Northern Borneo have a special
feast, the object of which is <q>to secure the soul of the rice,
which if not so detained, the produce of their farms would
speedily rot and decay. At sowing time, a little of the
principle of life of the rice, which at every harvest is secured
by their priests, is planted with their other seeds, and is thus
propagated and communicated.</q> The mode of securing the
soul of the rice varies in different tribes. In the Quop district
the ceremony is performed by the chief priest alone, first in the
long broad verandah of the common house and afterwards
in each separate family apartment. As a preparation for
the ceremony a bamboo altar, decorated with green boughs
and red and white streamers, is erected in the verandah,
and presents a very gay appearance. Here the people, old
and young, assemble, the priestesses dressed in gorgeous
array and the elder men wearing bright-coloured jackets and
trousers of purple, yellow, or scarlet hue, while the young
men and lads beat gongs and drums. When the priest,
with a bundle of charms in either hand, is observed to be
gazing earnestly in the air at something invisible to common
eyes, the band strikes up with redoubled energy, and the
elderly men in the gay breeches begin to shriek and revolve
round the altar in the dance. Suddenly the priest starts
up and makes a rush at the invisible object; men run to
him with white cloths, and as he shakes his charms over the
cloths a few grains of rice fall into them. These grains are
the soul of the rice; they are carefully folded up in the
cloths and laid at the foot of the altar. The same performance
is afterwards repeated in every family apartment. In
some tribes the soul of the rice is secured at midnight. Outside
the village a lofty altar is erected in an open space
surrounded by the stately forms of the tropical palms.
Huge bonfires cast a ruddy glow over the scene and light
up the dusky but picturesque forms of the Dyaks as they
move in slow and solemn dance round the altar, some
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
bearing lighted tapers in their hands, others brass salvers
with offerings of rice, others covered baskets, of which the
contents are hidden from all but the initiated. The corner-posts
of the altar are lofty bamboos, whose leafy tops are
yet green and rustle in the wind; and from one of them
a long narrow streamer of white cloth hangs down. Suddenly
elders and priests rush at this streamer, seize the end of it,
and amid the crashing music of drums and gongs and the
yells of the spectators begin dancing and swaying themselves
backwards and forwards, and to and fro. A priest or elder
mounts the altar amid the shouts of the bystanders and
shakes the tall bamboos violently; and in the midst of all
this excitement and hubbub small stones, bunches of hair,
and grains of rice fall at the feet of the dancers, and are
carefully picked up by watchful attendants. These grains
are the soul of the rice. The ceremony ends with several
of the oldest priestesses falling, or pretending to fall, senseless
to the ground, where, till they come to themselves, their
heads are supported and their faces fanned by their younger
colleagues. At the end of the harvest, when the year's crop
has been garnered, another feast is held. A pig and fowls
are killed, and for four days gongs are beaten and dancing
kept up. For eight days the village is tabooed and no
stranger may enter it. At this festival the ceremony of
catching the soul of the rice is repeated to prevent the crop
from rotting; and the soul so obtained is mixed with the
seed-rice of the next year.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1863), i. 187, 192 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. Chalmers,
quoted in H. Ling Roth's <hi rend='italic'>Natives of
Sarawak and British North Borneo</hi>
(London, 1896), i. 412-414.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Recalling
the soul of
the rice
among the
Karens of
Burma.</note>
The same need of securing the soul of the rice, if the
crop is to thrive, is keenly felt by the Karens of Burma.
When a rice-field does not flourish, they suppose that the
soul (<foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign>) of the rice is in some way detained from the rice.
If the soul cannot be called back, the crop will fail. The
following formula is used in recalling the <foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign> (soul) of the
rice: <q>O come, rice-<foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign>, come! Come to the field. Come
to the rice. With seed of each gender, come. Come from
the river Kho, come from the river Kaw; from the place
where they meet, come. Come from the West, come from
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
the East. From the throat of the bird, from the maw of
the ape, from the throat of the elephant. Come from the
sources of rivers and their mouths. Come from the country
of the Shan and Burman. From the distant kingdoms come.
From all granaries come. O rice-<foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign>, come to the rice.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. (1854) p. 309.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Securing
the soul of
the rice
in various
parts of
Burma.</note>
Among the Taungthu of Upper Burma it is customary,
when all the rice-fields have been reaped, to make a trail of
unhusked rice (paddy) and husks all the way from the fields
to the farm-house in order to guide the spirit or butterfly,
as they call it, of the rice home to the granary. Care is
taken that there should be no break in the trail, and the
butterfly of the rice is invited with loud cries to come to the
house. Were the spirit of the rice not secured in this
manner, next year's harvest would be bad.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P.
Hardiman, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma
and of the Shan States</hi> (Rangoon,
1900-1901), Part i. vol. i. p. 559.</note> Similarly among
the Cherokee Indians of North America <q>care was always
taken to keep a clean trail from the field to the house, so
that the corn might be encouraged to stay at home and not
go wandering elsewhere,</q> and <q>seven ears from the last
year's crop were always put carefully aside, in order to
<emph>attract the corn</emph>, until the new crop was ripened.</q><note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 423.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Hsa
Möng Hkam, a native state of Upper Burma, when two men
work rice-fields in partnership, they take particular care as
to the division of the grain between them. Each partner
has a basket made, of which both top and bottom are
carefully closed with wood to prevent the butterfly spirit of
the rice from escaping; for if it were to flutter away, the next
year's crop would be but poor.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> Part ii. vol. i. p. 172.</note> Among the Talaings of
Lower Burma <q>the last sheaf is larger than the rest; it is
brought home separately, usually if not invariably on the
morning after the remainder of the harvest has been carted
to the threshing-floor. The cultivators drive out in their
bullock-cart, taking with them a woman's comb, a looking-glass,
and a woman's skirt. The sheaf is dressed in the
skirt, and apparently the form is gone through of presenting
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
it with the glass and comb. It is then brought home in
triumph, the people decking the cart with their silk kerchiefs,
and cheering and singing the whole way. On their arrival
home they celebrate the occasion with a feast. Strictly
speaking the sheaf should be kept apart from the rest of the
harvest; owing, however, to the high price of paddy it often
finds its way to the threshing-floor. Even when this is not
the case it is rarely tended so carefully as it is said to have
been in former days, and if not threshed with the remaining
crop is apt to be eaten by the cattle. So far as I could
ascertain it had never been the custom to keep it throughout
the year; but on the first ploughing of the ensuing season
there was some ceremony in connection with it. The name
of the sheaf was <foreign rend='italic'>Bonmagyi</foreign>; at first I was inclined to fancy
that this was a contraction of <foreign rend='italic'>thelinbon ma gyi</foreign>, <q>the old
woman of the threshing-floor.</q> There are, however, various
reasons for discarding this derivation, and I am unable to
suggest any other.</q><note place='foot'>From a letter written to me by
Mr. J. S. Furnivall and dated Pegu
Club, Rangoon, 6/6 (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>). Mr.
Furnivall adds that in Upper Burma
the custom of the <foreign rend='italic'>Bonmagyi</foreign> sheaf is
unknown.</note> In this custom the personification of
the last sheaf of rice as a woman comes out clearly in the
practice of dressing it up in female attire.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Rice-mother
among the
Minangkabauers
of
Sumatra.</note>
The Corn-mother of our European peasants has her
match in the Rice-mother of the Minangkabauers of
Sumatra. The Minangkabauers definitely attribute a soul
to rice, and will sometimes assert that rice pounded in the
usual way tastes better than rice ground in a mill, because
in the mill the body of the rice was so bruised and battered
that the soul has fled from it. Like the Javanese they
think that the rice is under the special guardianship of a
female spirit called Saning Sari, who is conceived as so
closely knit up with the plant that the rice often goes by
her name, as with the Romans the corn might be called
Ceres. In particular Saning Sari is represented by certain
stalks or grains called <foreign rend='italic'>indoea padi</foreign>, that is, literally, <q>Mother
of Rice,</q> a name that is often given to the guardian spirit
herself. This so-called Mother of Rice is the occasion of a
number of ceremonies observed at the planting and harvesting
of the rice as well as during its preservation in the barn.
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
When the seed of the rice is about to be sown in the
nursery or bedding-out ground, where under the wet system
of cultivation it is regularly allowed to sprout before being
transplanted to the fields, the best grains are picked out to
form the Rice-mother. These are then sown in the middle
of the bed, and the common seed is planted round about
them. The state of the Rice-mother is supposed to exert
the greatest influence on the growth of the rice; if she
droops or pines away, the harvest will be bad in consequence.
The woman who sows the Rice-mother in the nursery lets
her hair hang loose and afterwards bathes, as a means of
ensuring an abundant harvest. When the time comes to
transplant the rice from the nursery to the field, the Rice-mother
receives a special place either in the middle or in a
corner of the field, and a prayer or charm is uttered as
follows: <q>Saning Sari, may a measure of rice come from a
stalk of rice and a basketful from a root; may you be
frightened neither by lightning nor by passers-by! Sunshine
make you glad; with the storm may you be at peace; and
may rain serve to wash your face!</q> While the rice is
growing, the particular plant which was thus treated as the
Rice-mother is lost sight of; but before harvest another
Rice-mother is found. When the crop is ripe for cutting,
the oldest woman of the family or a sorcerer goes out to
look for her. The first stalks seen to bend under a passing
breeze are the Rice-mother, and they are tied together but
not cut until the first-fruits of the field have been carried
home to serve as a festal meal for the family and their
friends, nay even for the domestic animals; since it is Saning
Sari's pleasure that the beasts also should partake of her
good gifts. After the meal has been eaten, the Rice-mother
is fetched home by persons in gay attire, who carry her very
carefully under an umbrella in a neatly worked bag to the
barn, where a place in the middle is assigned to her. Every
one believes that she takes care of the rice in the barn and
even multiplies it not uncommonly.<note place='foot'>J. L. van der Toorn, <q>Het
animisme bij den Minangkabauer der
Padangsche Bovenlanden,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch Indië</hi>, xxxix. (1890) pp.
63-65. In the charm recited at sowing
the Rice-mother in the bed, I have
translated the Dutch word <foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>stoel</foreign> as
<q>root,</q> but I am not sure of its precise
meaning in this connexion. It is
doubtless identical with the English
agricultural term <q>to stool,</q> which is
said of a number of stalks sprouting
from a single seed, as I learn from
my friend Professor W. Somerville of
Oxford.</note>
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Rice-mother
among the
Tomori of
Celebes.
Special
words used
at reaping
among the
Tomori. Riddles
and stories
in connexion
with
the rice.</note>
When the Tomori of Central Celebes are about to plant
the rice, they bury in the field some betel as an offering to
the spirits who cause the rice to grow. Over the spot where
the offering is buried a small floor of wood is laid, and the
family sits on it and consumes betel together as a sort of
silent prayer or charm to ensure the growth of the crop.
The rice that is planted round this spot is the last to be
reaped at harvest. At the commencement of the reaping
the stalks of this patch of rice are tied together into a sheaf,
which is called <q>the Mother of the Rice</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>ineno pae</foreign>), and
offerings in the shape of rice, fowl's liver, eggs, and other
things are laid down before it. When all the rest of the
rice in the field has been reaped, <q>the Mother of the Rice</q>
is cut down and carried with due honour to the rice-barn,
where it is laid on the floor, and all the other sheaves are
piled upon it. The Tomori, we are told, regard the Mother
of the Rice as a special offering made to the rice-spirit
Omonga, who dwells in the moon. If that spirit is not
treated with proper respect, for example if the people who
fetch rice from the barn are not decently clad, he is angry
and punishes the offenders by eating up twice as much rice
in the barn as they have taken out of it; some people have
heard him smacking his lips in the barn, as he devoured the
rice. On the other hand the Toradjas of Central Celebes,
who also practise the custom of the Rice-mother at harvest,
regard her as the actual mother of the whole harvest, and
therefore keep her carefully, lest in her absence the garnered
store of rice should all melt away and disappear.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xliv. (1900) pp.
227, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among
the Tomori, as among other Indonesian peoples, reapers at
work in the field make use of special words which differ
from the terms in ordinary use; the reason for adopting this
peculiar form of speech at reaping appears to be, as I have
already pointed out, a fear of alarming the timid soul of the
rice by revealing the fate in store for it.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul</hi>, pp. 411 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> To the same
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
motive is perhaps to be ascribed the practice observed
by the Tomori of asking each other riddles at harvest.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 228.</note>
Similarly among the Alfoors or Toradjas of Poso, in Central
Celebes, while the people are watching the crops in the fields
they amuse themselves with asking each other riddles and
telling stories, and when any one guesses a riddle aright, the
whole company cries out, <q>Let our rice come up, let fat ears
come up both in the lowlands and on the heights.</q> But all
the time between harvest and the laying out of new fields
the asking of riddles and the telling of stories is strictly
forbidden.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschapelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix. (1895)
pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus among these people it seems that the
asking of riddles is for some reason regarded as a charm
which may make or mar the crops.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Rice-mother
among the
Toradjas
of Celebes.</note>
Among some of the Toradjas of Celebes the ceremony
of cutting and bringing home the Mother of the Rice
is observed as follows. When the crop is ripe in the
fields, the Mother of the Rice (<foreign rend='italic'>ânrong pâre</foreign>) must be
fetched before the rest of the harvest is reaped. The
ceremony is performed on a lucky day by a woman, who
knows the rites. For three days previously she observes
certain precautions to prevent the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>soemangâna âse</foreign>) of
the rice from escaping out of the field, as it might be apt to
do, if it got wind that the reapers with their cruel knives
were so soon to crop the ripe ears. With this view she ties
up a handful of standing stalks of the rice into a bunch in
each corner of the field, while she recites an invocation
to the spirits of the rice, bidding them gather in the field
from the four quarters of the heaven. As a further precaution
she stops the sluices, lest with the outrush of the
water from the rice-field the sly soul of the rice should make
good its escape. And she ties knots in the leaves of the
rice-plants, all to hinder the soul of the rice from running
away. This she does in the afternoon of three successive
days. On the morning of the fourth day she comes again
to the field, sits down in a corner of it, and kisses the rice
three times, again inviting the souls of the rice to come
thither and assuring them of her affection and care. Then
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
she cuts the bunch of rice-stalks which she had tied together
on one of the previous days. The stalks in the bunch must
be nine in number, and their leaves must be cut with them,
not thrown away. As she cuts, she may not look about
her, nor cry out, nor speak to any one, nor be spoken to;
but she says to the rice, <q>The prophet reaps you. I take
you, but you diminish not; I hold you in my hand and you
increase. You are the links of my soul, the support of my
body, my blessing, my salvation. There is no God but
God.</q> Then she passes to another corner of the field to
cut the bunch of standing rice in it with the same ceremony;
but before coming to it she stops half way to pluck another
bunch of five stalks in like manner. Thus from the four
sides of the field she collects in all fifty-six stalks of rice,
which together make up the Mother of the Rice (<foreign rend='italic'>ânrong
pâre</foreign>). Then in a corner of the field she makes a little
stage and lays the Mother of the Rice on it, with the ears
turned towards the standing rice and the cut stalks
towards the dyke which encloses the field. After that she
binds the fifty-six stalks of the Rice-mother into a sheaf
with the bark of a particular kind of tree. As she does so,
she says, <q>The prophet binds you into a sheaf; the angel
increases you; the <foreign rend='italic'>awâlli</foreign> cares for you. We loved and
cared for each other.</q> Then, after anointing the sheaf and
fumigating it with incense, she lays it on the little stage.
On this stage she had previously placed several kinds of
rice, betel, one or more eggs, sweetmeats, and young coco-nuts,
all as offerings to the Mother of the Rice, who, if she
did not receive these attentions, would be offended and visit
people with sickness or even vanish away altogether. Sometimes
on large farms a fowl is killed and its blood deposited
in the half of a coco-nut on the stage. The standing rice
round about the stage is the last of the whole field to be
reaped. When it has been cut, it is bound up with the
Mother of the Rice into a single sheaf and carried home.
Any body may carry the sheaf, but in doing so he or she
must take care not to let it fall, or the Rice-mother would be
angry and might disappear.<note place='foot'>G. Maan, <q>Eenige mededeelingen
omtrent de zeden en gewoonten der
Toerateya ten opzichte van den
rijstbouw,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlvi.
(1903) pp. 330-337. The writer dates
his article from Tanneteya (in Celebes?),
but otherwise gives no indication of the
geographical position of the people he
describes. A similar omission is common
with Dutch writers on the
geography and ethnology of the East
Indies, who too often appear to assume
that the uncouth names of these barbarous
tribes and obscure hamlets are as
familiar to European readers as Amsterdam
or the Hague. The Toerateyas
whose customs Mr. Maan describes in
this article are the inland inhabitants
of Celebes. Their name Toerateyas or
Toradjas signifies simply <q>inlanders</q>
and is applied to them by their neighbours
who live nearer the sea; it is
not a name used by the people themselves.
The Toradjas include many
tribes and the particular tribe whose
usages in regard to the Rice-mother
are described in the text is probably
not one of those whose customs and
beliefs have been described by Mr. A.
C. Kruijt in many valuable papers.
See above, p. 183 note 1, and <hi rend='italic'>The Magic
Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i. 109
note 1.</note>
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rice
personified
as a young
woman
among the
Bataks of
Sumatra.</note>
Among the Battas or Bataks of Sumatra the rice appears
to be personified as a young unmarried woman rather than
as a mother. On the first day of reaping the crop only a
few ears of rice are plucked and made up into a little sheaf.
After that the reaping may begin, and while it is going
forward offerings of rice and betel are presented in the
middle of the field to the spirit of the rice, who is personified
under the name of Miss Dajang. The offering is accompanied
by a common meal shared by the reapers. When
all the rice has been reaped, threshed and garnered, the little
sheaf which was first cut is brought in and laid on the top
of the heap in the granary, together with an egg or a stone,
which is supposed to watch over the rice.<note place='foot'>M. Joustra, <q>Het leven, de zeden
en gewoonten der Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlvi. (1902) pp.
425 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Though we are
not told, we may assume that the personified spirit of the
rice is supposed to be present in the first sheaf cut and in
that form to keep guard over the rice in the granary.
Another writer, who has independently described the customs
of the Karo-Bataks at the rice-harvest, tells us that the largest
sheaf, which is usually the one first made up, is regarded as
the seat of the rice-soul and is treated exactly like a person;
at the trampling of the paddy to separate the grain from
the husks the sheaf in question is specially entrusted to
a girl who has a lucky name, and whose parents are both
alive.<note place='foot'>J. H. Neumann, <q>Iets over den
landbouw bij de Karo-Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlvi. (1902) pp.
380 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the employment in
ritual of young people whose parents
are both alive, see <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,
Second Edition, pp. 413 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The King
of the
Rice in
Mandeling.</note>
In Mandeling, a district of Sumatra, contrary to what
seems to be the usual practice, the spirit of the rice is personified
as a male instead of as a female and is called the Rajah
or King of the Rice. He is supposed to be immanent in
certain rice-plants, which are recognised by their peculiar
formation, such as a concealment of the ears in the sheath,
an unusual arrangement of the leaves, or a stunted growth.
When one or more such plants have been discovered in the
field, they are sprinkled with lime-juice, and the spirits are
invoked by name and informed that they are expected at
home and that all is ready for their reception. Then the
King of the Rice is plucked with the hand and seven
neighbouring rice-stalks cut with a knife. He and his seven
companions are then carefully brought home; the bearer
may not speak a word, and the children in the house may
make no noise till the King of the Rice has been safely
lodged in the granary and tethered, for greater security, with
a grass rope to one of the posts. As soon as that is done,
the doors are shut to prevent the spirits of the rice from
escaping. The person who fetches the King of the Rice
from the field should prepare himself for the important duty
by eating a hearty meal, for it would be an omen of a bad
harvest if he presented himself before the King of the
Rice with an empty stomach. For the same reason the
sower of rice should sow the seed on a full stomach, in
order that the ears which spring from the seed may be full
also.<note place='foot'>A. L. van Hasselt, <q>Nota, betreffende
de rijstcultuur in de Residentie
Tapanoeli,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxvi.
(1893) pp. 526-529; Th. A. L.
Heyting, <q>Beschrijving der Onderafdeeling
Groot- mandeling en Batangnatal,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>, Tweede
Serie, xiv. (1897) pp. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to
the rule of sowing seed on a full
stomach, which is a simple case of
homoeopathic or imitative magic, see
further <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 136.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Rice-mother
and
the Rice-child
at
harvest in
the Malay
Peninsula.</note>
Again, just as in Scotland the old and the young spirit
of the corn are represented as an Old Wife (<foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>) and
a Maiden respectively, so in the Malay Peninsula we find
both the Rice-mother and her child represented by different
sheaves or bundles of ears on the harvest-field. The following
directions for obtaining both are translated from a native
Malay work on the cultivation of rice: <q>When the rice is
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
ripe all over, one must first take the <q>soul</q> out of all the
plots of one's field. You choose the spot where the rice is
best and where it is <q>female</q> (that is to say, where the
bunch of stalks is big) and where there are seven joints in
the stalk. You begin with a bunch of this kind and clip
seven stems to be the <q>soul of the rice</q>; and then you clip
yet another handful to be the <q>mother-seed</q> for the following
year. The <q>soul</q> is wrapped in a white cloth tied with a
cord of <foreign rend='italic'>tĕrap</foreign> bark, and made into the shape of a little child
in swaddling clothes, and put into the small basket. The
<q>mother-seed</q> is put into another basket, and both are
fumigated with benzoin, and then the two baskets are
piled the one on the other and taken home, and put into
the <foreign rend='italic'>kĕpuk</foreign> (the receptacle in which rice is stored).</q><note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi> (London, 1900), pp. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
ceremony of cutting and bringing home the Soul of the Rice
was witnessed by Mr. W. W. Skeat at Chodoi in Selangor
on the twenty-eighth of January 1897. The particular
bunch or sheaf which was to serve as the Mother of the
Rice-soul had previously been sought and identified by
means of the markings or shape of the ears. From this
sheaf an aged sorceress, with much solemnity, cut a little
bundle of seven ears, anointed them with oil, tied them
round with parti-coloured thread, fumigated them with
incense, and having wrapt them in a white cloth deposited
them in a little oval-shaped basket. These seven ears were
the infant Soul of the Rice and the little basket was its
cradle. It was carried home to the farmer's house by
another woman, who held up an umbrella to screen the
tender infant from the hot rays of the sun. Arrived at the
house the Rice-child was welcomed by the women of the
family, and laid, cradle and all, on a new sleeping-mat with
pillows at the head. After that the farmer's wife was
instructed to observe certain rules of taboo for three days,
the rules being in many respects identical with those which
have to be observed for three days after the birth of a real
child. For example, perfect quiet must be observed, as in
a house where a baby has just been born; a light was
placed near the head of the Rice-child's bed and might not
go out at night, while the fire on the hearth had to be kept
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
up both day and night till the three days were over; hair
might not be cut; and money, rice, salt, oil, and so forth
were forbidden to go out of the house, though of course
these valuable articles were quite free to come in. Something
of the same tender care which is thus bestowed on
the newly-born Rice-child is naturally extended also to its
parent, the sheaf from whose body it was taken. This
sheaf, which remains standing in the field after the Rice-soul
has been carried home and put to bed, is treated as a newly-made
mother; that is to say, young shoots of trees are
pounded together and scattered broadcast every evening for
three successive days, and when the three days are up you
take the pulp of a coco-nut and what are called <q>goat-flowers,</q>
mix them up, eat them with a little sugar, and spit
some of the mixture out among the rice. So after a real
birth the young shoots of the jack-fruit, the rose-apple, certain
kinds of banana, and the thin pulp of young coco-nuts are
mixed with dried fish, salt, acid, prawn-condiment, and the
like dainties to form a sort of salad, which is administered
to mother and child for three successive days. The last
sheaf is reaped by the farmer's wife, who carries it back to
the house, where it is threshed and mixed with the Rice-soul.
The farmer then takes the Rice-soul and its basket and
deposits it, together with the product of the last sheaf, in
the big circular rice-bin used by the Malays. Some grains
from the Rice-soul are mixed with the seed which is to be
sown in the following year.<note place='foot'>W. W. Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, pp. 235-249.</note> In this Rice-mother and Rice-child
of the Malay Peninsula we may see the counterpart
and in a sense the prototype of the Demeter and Persephone
of ancient Greece.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Rice-bride
and
the Rice-bridegroom
at
harvest in
Java.</note>
Once more, the European custom of representing the
corn-spirit in the double form of bride and bridegroom<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> has
its parallel in a ceremony observed at the rice-harvest in
Java. Before the reapers begin to cut the rice, the priest or
sorcerer picks out a number of ears of rice, which are tied
together, smeared with ointment, and adorned with flowers.
Thus decked out, the ears are called the <foreign rend='italic'>padi-pĕngantèn</foreign>, that
is, the Rice-bride and the Rice-bridegroom; their wedding
feast is celebrated, and the cutting of the rice begins immediately
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
afterwards. Later on, when the rice is being got
in, a bridal chamber is partitioned off in the barn, and
furnished with a new mat, a lamp, and all kinds of toilet
articles. Sheaves of rice, to represent the wedding guests,
are placed beside the Rice-bride and the Rice-bridegroom.
Not till this has been done may the whole harvest be housed
in the barn. And for the first forty days after the rice has
been housed, no one may enter the barn, for fear of disturbing
the newly-wedded pair.<note place='foot'>P. J. Veth, <hi rend='italic'>Java</hi> (Haarlem,
1875-1884), i. 524-526. The ceremony
has also been described by Miss
Augusta de Wit (<hi rend='italic'>Facts and Fancies about
Java</hi>, Singapore, 1898, pp. 229-241),
who lays stress on the extreme importance
of the rice-harvest for the Javanese.
The whole island of Java, she tells us,
<q>is one vast rice-field. Rice on the
swampy plains, rice on the rising ground,
rice on the slopes, rice on the very
summits of the hills. From the sod
under one's feet to the verge of the
horizon, everything has one and the
same colour, the bluish-green of the
young, or the gold of the ripened rice.
The natives are all, without exception,
tillers of the soil, who reckon their lives
by seasons of planting and reaping,
whose happiness or misery is synonymous
with the abundance or the dearth
of the precious grain. And the great
national feast is the harvest home, with
its crowning ceremony of the Wedding
of the Rice</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). I have
to thank my friend Dr. A. C. Haddon
for directing my attention to Miss de
Wit's book.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Another
account
of the
Javanese
custom.</note>
Another account of the Javanese custom runs as
follows. When the rice at harvest is to be brought home,
two handfuls of common unhusked rice (paddy) are tied
together into a sheaf, and two handfuls of a special
kind of rice (<foreign rend='italic'>kleefrijst</foreign>) are tied up into another sheaf;
then the two sheaves are fastened together in a bundle
which goes by the name of <q>the bridal pair</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>pĕn-gantenan</foreign>).
The special rice is the bridegroom, the common
rice is the bride. At the barn <q>the bridal pair</q> is received
on a winnowing-fan by a wizard, who removes them from
the fan and lays them on the floor with a couch of <foreign rend='italic'>kloewih</foreign>
leaves under them <q>in order that the rice may increase,</q> and
beside them he places a <foreign rend='italic'>kĕmiri</foreign> nut, tamarind pips, and a top
and string as playthings with which the young couple may
divert themselves. The bride is called Emboq Sri and the
bridegroom Sadana, and the wizard addresses them by name,
saying: <q>Emboq Sri and Sadana, I have now brought you
home and I have prepared a place for you. May you sleep
agreeably in this agreeable place! Emboq Sri and Sadana,
you have been received by So-and-So (the owner), let So-and-So
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
lead a life free from care. May Emboq Sri's luck
continue in this very agreeable place!</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Gebruiken bij den
rijstoogst in enkele streken op Oost-Java,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xlvii. (1903) pp. 132-134. Compare
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>De rijst-moeder in den Indischen
Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen
der koninklijke Akademie van
Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling Letterkunde,
Vierde Reeks, v. part 4 (Amsterdam,
1903), pp. 398 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rice-spirit
as
husband
and wife
in Bali and
Lombok.</note>
The same idea of the rice-spirit as a husband and wife
meets us also in the harvest customs of Bali and Lombok,
two islands which lie immediately to the east of Java. <q>The
inhabitants of Lombok,</q> we are told, <q>think of the rice-plant
as animated by a soul. They regard it as one with a
divinity and treat it with the distinction and honour that are
shewn to a very important person. But as it is impossible
to treat all the rice-stalks in a field ceremoniously, the native,
feeling the need of a visible and tangible representative of
the rice-deity and taking a part for the whole, picks out
some stalks and conceives them as the visible abode of the
rice-soul, to which he can pay his homage and from which
he hopes to derive advantage. These few stalks, the foremost
among their many peers, form what is called the <foreign rend='italic'>ninin
pantun</foreign> by the people of Bali and the <foreign rend='italic'>inan paré</foreign> by the
Sassaks</q> of Lombok.<note place='foot'>J. C. van Eerde, <q>Gebruiken bij
den rijstbouw en rijstoogst op Lombok,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlv. (1902) pp. 563-565
note.</note> The name <foreign rend='italic'>ina paré</foreign> is sometimes
translated Rice-mother, but the more correct translation is
said to be <q>the principal rice.</q> The stalks of which this
<q>principal rice</q> consists are the first nine shoots which the
husbandman himself takes with his own hands from the
nursery or bedding-out ground and plants at the upper end
of the rice-field beside the inlet of the irrigation water. They
are planted with great care in a definite order, one of them
in the middle and the other eight in a circle about it. When
the whole field has been planted, an offering, which usually
consists of rice in many forms, is made to <q>the principal
rice</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>inan paré</foreign>). When the rice-stalks begin to swell the
rice is said to be pregnant, and the <q>principal rice</q> is
treated with the delicate attentions which are paid to a
woman with child. Thus rice-pap and eggs are laid down
beside it, and sour fruits are often presented to it, because
pregnant women are believed to long for sour fruit. Moreover
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
the fertilisation of the rice by the irrigation water is
compared to the union of the goddess Batari Sri with her
husband Ida Batara (Vishnu), who is identified with the
flowing water. Some people sprinkle the pregnant rice
with water in which cooling drugs have been infused or with
water which has stood on a holy grave, in order that the
ears may fill out well. When the time of harvest has come,
the owner of the field himself makes a beginning by cutting
<q>the principal rice</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>inan paré</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>ninin pantun</foreign>) with his
own hands and binding it into two sheaves, each composed
of one hundred and eight stalks with their leaves
attached to them. One of the sheaves represents a man
and the other a woman, and they are called <q>husband and
wife</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>istri kakung</foreign>). The male sheaf is wound about with
thread so that none of the leaves are visible, whereas the
female sheaf has its leaves bent over and tied so as to
resemble the roll of a woman's hair. Sometimes, for further
distinction, a necklace of rice-straw is tied round the female
sheaf. The two sheaves are then fastened together and tied
to a branch of a tree, which is stuck in the ground at the
inlet of the irrigation water. There they remain while all
the rest of the rice is being reaped. Sometimes, instead of
being tied to a bough, they are laid on a little bamboo altar.
The reapers at their work take great care to let no grains of
rice fall on the ground, otherwise the Rice-goddess would
grieve and weep at being parted from her sisters, who are
carried to the barn. If any portion of the field remains
unreaped at nightfall, the reapers make loops in the leaves
of some of the standing stalks to prevent the evil spirits
from proceeding with the harvest during the hours of darkness,
or, according to another account, lest the Rice-goddess
should go astray. When the rice is brought home from
the field, the two sheaves representing the husband and
wife are carried by a woman on her head, and are the last
of all to be deposited in the barn. There they are laid to
rest on a small erection or on a cushion of rice-straw
along with three lumps of <foreign rend='italic'>nasi</foreign>, which are regarded
as the attendants or watchers of the bridal pair. The
whole arrangement, we are informed, has for its object
to induce the rice to increase and multiply in the granary,
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
so that the owner may get more out of it than he
put in. Hence when the people of Bali bring the two
sheaves, the husband and wife, into the barn, they say
<q>Increase ye and multiply without ceasing.</q> When a
woman fetches rice from the granary for the use of her
household, she has to observe a number of rules, all of
which are clearly dictated by respect for the spirit of the
rice. She should not enter the barn in the dark or at noon
perhaps because the spirit may then be supposed to be
sleeping. She must enter with her right foot first. She
must be decently clad with her breasts covered. She must
not chew betel, and she would do well to rinse her mouth
before repairing to the barn, just as she would do if she
waited on a person of distinction or on a divinity. No sick
or menstruous woman may enter the barn, and there must
be no talking in it, just as there must be no talking when
shelled rice is being scooped up. When all the rice in the
barn has been used up, the two sheaves representing the husband
and wife remain in the empty building till they have
gradually disappeared or been devoured by mice. The
pinch of hunger sometimes drives individuals to eat up the
rice of these two sheaves, but the wretches who do so are
viewed with disgust by their fellows and branded as pigs
and dogs. Nobody would ever sell these holy sheaves with
the rest of their profane brethren.<note place='foot'>J. C. van Eerde, <q>Gebruiken bij
den rijstbouw en rijstoogst op Lombok,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde</hi>, xlv. (1902) pp. 563-573.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Father
and
Mother
of the Rice
among the
Szis of
Burma.</note>
The same notion of the propagation of the rice by a
male and female power finds expression amongst the Szis of
Upper Burma. When the paddy, that is, the rice with the
husks still on it, has been dried and piled in a heap for
threshing, all the friends of the household are invited to the
threshing-floor, and food and drink are brought out. The
heap of paddy is divided and one half spread out for
threshing, while the other half is left piled up. On the pile
food and spirits are set, and one of the elders, addressing
<q>the father and mother of the paddy-plant,</q> prays for
plenteous harvests in future, and begs that the seed may
bear many fold. Then the whole party eat, drink, and
make merry. This ceremony at the threshing-floor is the
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
only occasion when these people invoke <q>the father and
mother of the paddy.</q><note place='foot'>(Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman,
<hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the
Shan States</hi>, Part i. vol. i. (Rangoon,
1900) p. 426.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. The Spirit of the Corn embodied in Human Beings.'/>
<head>§ 5. The Spirit of the Corn embodied in Human Beings.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The spirit
of the corn
sometimes
thought to
be embodied
in
men or
women.</note>
Thus the theory which recognises in the European Corn-mother,
Corn-maiden, and so forth, the embodiment in
vegetable form of the animating spirit of the crops is amply
confirmed by the evidence of peoples in other parts of the
world, who, because they have lagged behind the European races
in mental development, retain for that very reason a keener
sense of the original motives for observing those rustic rites
which among ourselves have sunk to the level of meaningless
survivals. The reader may, however, remember that according
to Mannhardt, whose theory I am expounding, the spirit
of the corn manifests itself not merely in vegetable but also
in human form; the person who cuts the last sheaf or gives
the last stroke at threshing passes for a temporary embodiment
of the corn-spirit, just as much as the bunch of corn
which he reaps or threshes. Now in the parallels which have
been hitherto adduced from the customs of peoples outside
Europe the spirit of the crops appears only in vegetable
form. It remains, therefore, to prove that other races besides
our European peasantry have conceived the spirit of
the crops as incorporate in or represented by living men
and women. Such a proof, I may remind the reader, is
germane to the theme of this book; for the more instances
we discover of human beings representing in themselves
the life or animating spirit of plants, the less difficulty will
be felt at classing amongst them the King of the Wood at
Nemi.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Old
Woman
who Never
Dies, the
goddess of
the crops
among the
Mandans
and Minnitarees.</note>
The Mandans and Minnitarees of North America used
to hold a festival in spring which they called the corn-medicine
festival of the women. They thought that a certain
Old Woman who Never Dies made the crops to grow, and
that, living somewhere in the south, she sent the migratory
waterfowl in spring as her tokens and representatives. Each
sort of bird represented a special kind of crop cultivated by
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
the Indians: the wild goose stood for the maize, the wild
swan for the gourds, and the wild duck for the beans. So
when the feathered messengers of the Old Woman began to
arrive in spring the Indians celebrated the corn-medicine
festival of the women. Scaffolds were set up, on which the
people hung dried meat and other things by way of offerings
to the Old Woman; and on a certain day the old women of
the tribe, as representatives of the Old Woman who Never
Dies, assembled at the scaffolds each bearing in her hand an
ear of maize fastened to a stick. They first planted these
sticks in the ground, then danced round the scaffolds, and
finally took up the sticks again in their arms. Meanwhile
old men beat drums and shook rattles as a musical accompaniment
to the performance of the old women. Further,
young women came and put dried flesh into the mouths of
the old women, for which they received in return a grain of
the consecrated maize to eat. Three or four grains of the
holy corn were also placed in the dishes of the young women,
to be afterwards carefully mixed with the seed-corn, which
they were supposed to fertilise. The dried flesh hung on
the scaffold belonged to the old women, because they represented
the Old Woman who Never Dies. A similar corn-medicine
festival was held in autumn for the purpose of
attracting the herds of buffaloes and securing a supply of
meat. At that time every woman carried in her arms an
uprooted plant of maize. They gave the name of the Old
Woman who Never Dies both to the maize and to those
birds which they regarded as symbols of the fruits of the
earth, and they prayed to them in autumn saying, <q>Mother,
have pity on us! send us not the bitter cold too soon, lest
we have not meat enough! let not all the game depart, that
we may have something for the winter!</q> In autumn, when
the birds were flying south, the Indians thought that they
were going home to the Old Woman and taking to her the
offerings that had been hung up on the scaffolds, especially
the dried meat, which she ate.<note place='foot'>Maximilian, Prinz zu Wied, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in das innere Nord-America</hi> (Coblenz,
1839-1841), ii. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here then we have the
spirit or divinity of the corn conceived as an Old Woman
and represented in bodily form by old women, who in their
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
capacity of representatives receive some at least of the
offerings which are intended for her.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Miami
myth of
the Corn-spirit
in
the form
of a
broken-down
old man.</note>
The Miamis, another tribe of North American Indians,
tell a tale in which the spirit of the corn figures as a broken-down
old man. They say that corn, that is, maize, first
grew in heaven, and that the Good Spirit commanded it to
go down and dwell with men on earth. At first it was
reluctant to do so, but the Good Spirit prevailed on it to go
by promising that men would treat it well in return for the
benefit they derived from it. <q>So corn came down from
heaven to benefit the Indian, and this is the reason why
they esteem it, and are bound to take good care of it, and to
nurture it, and not raise more than they actually require,
for their own consumption.</q> But once a whole town of the
Miamis was severely punished for failing in respect for the
corn. They had raised a great crop and stored much of it
under ground, and much of it they packed for immediate
use in bags. But the corn was so plentiful that much of it
still remained on the stalks, and the young men grew reckless
and played with the shelled cobs, throwing them at each
other, and at last they even broke the cobs from the growing
stalks and pelted each other with them too. But a judgment
soon followed on such wicked conduct. For when the
hunters went out to hunt, though the deer seemed to abound,
they could kill nothing. So the corn was gone and they
could get no meat, and the people were hungry. Well, one
of the hunters, roaming by himself in the woods to find
something to eat for his aged father, came upon a small
lodge in the wilderness where a decrepit old man was lying
with his back to the fire. Now the old man was no other
than the Spirit of the Corn. He said to the young hunter,
<q>My grandson, the Indians have afflicted me much, and
reduced me to the sad state in which you see me. In the
side of the lodge you will find a small kettle. Take it and
eat, and when you have satisfied your hunger, I will speak
to you.</q> But the kettle was full of such fine sweet corn as
the hunter had never in his life seen before. When he had
eaten his fill, the old man resumed the thread of his discourse,
saying, <q>Your people have wantonly abused and
reduced me to the state you now see me in: my back-bone
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
is broken in many places; it was the foolish young men of
your town who did me this evil, for I am Mondamin, or
corn, that came down from heaven. In their play they
threw corn-cobs and corn-ears at one another, treating me
with contempt. I am the corn-spirit whom they have
injured. That is why you experience bad luck and famine.
I am the cause; you feel my just resentment, therefore
your people are punished. Other Indians do not treat me
so. They respect me, and so it is well with them. Had
you no elders to check the youths at their wanton sport?
You are an eye-witness of my sufferings. They are the
effect of what you did to my body.</q> With that he groaned
and covered himself up. So the young hunter returned and
reported what he had seen and heard; and since then the
Indians have been very careful not to play with corn in
the ear.<note place='foot'>H. R. Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes
of the United States</hi>, v. (Philadelphia,
1856) pp. 193-195.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
harvest-goddess
Gauri represented
by a girl
and a
bundle of
plants.</note>
In some parts of India the harvest-goddess Gauri is
represented at once by an unmarried girl and by a bundle
of wild balsam plants, which is made up into the figure of a
woman and dressed as such with mask, garments, and ornaments.
Both the human and the vegetable representative
of the goddess are worshipped, and the intention of the
whole ceremony appears to be to ensure a good crop of
rice.<note place='foot'>B. A. Gupte, <q>Harvest Festivals
in honour of Gauri and Ganesh,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Indian
Antiquary</hi>, xxxv. (1906) p. 61.
For details see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. The Double Personification of the Corn
as Mother and Daughter.'/>
<head>§ 6. The Double Personification of the Corn as Mother
and Daughter.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy of
Demeter
and Persephone
to
the Corn-mother,
the
Harvest-maiden,
and similar
figures in
the harvest
customs of
modern
European
peasantry. The rustic
analogues
of Demeter
and Persephone.</note>
Compared with the Corn-mother of Germany and the
Harvest-maiden of Scotland, the Demeter and Persephone
of Greece are late products of religious growth. Yet as
members of the Aryan family the Greeks must at one
time or another have observed harvest customs like those
which are still practised by Celts, Teutons, and Slavs, and
which, far beyond the limits of the Aryan world, have
been practised by the Indians of Peru, the Dyaks of
Borneo, and many other natives of the East Indies&mdash;a
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
sufficient proof that the ideas on which these customs rest
are not confined to any one race, but naturally suggest themselves
to all untutored peoples engaged in agriculture. It
is probable, therefore, that Demeter and Persephone, those
stately and beautiful figures of Greek mythology, grew out
of the same simple beliefs and practices which still prevail
among our modern peasantry, and that they were represented
by rude dolls made out of the yellow sheaves on many a
harvest-field long before their breathing images were wrought
in bronze and marble by the master hands of Phidias and
Praxiteles. A reminiscence of that olden time&mdash;a scent, so
to say, of the harvest-field&mdash;lingered to the last in the title
of the Maiden (<foreign rend='italic'>Kore</foreign>) by which Persephone was commonly
known. Thus if the prototype of Demeter is the Corn-mother
of Germany, the prototype of Persephone is the
Harvest-maiden, which, autumn after autumn, is still made
from the last sheaf on the Braes of Balquhidder. Indeed, if
we knew more about the peasant-farmers of ancient Greece,
we should probably find that even in classical times they
continued annually to fashion their Corn-mothers (Demeters)
and Maidens (Persephones) out of the ripe corn on the
harvest-fields.<note place='foot'>It is possible that the image of
Demeter with corn and poppies in her
hands, which Theocritus (vii. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>)
describes as standing on a rustic threshing-floor
(see above, p. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>), may have
been a Corn-mother or a Corn-maiden
of the kind described in the text. The
suggestion was made to me by my
learned and esteemed friend Dr. W.
H. D. Rouse.</note> But unfortunately the Demeter and Persephone
whom we know were the denizens of towns, the majestic
inhabitants of lordly temples; it was for such divinities
alone that the refined writers of antiquity had eyes; the
uncouth rites performed by rustics amongst the corn were
beneath their notice. Even if they noticed them, they
probably never dreamed of any connexion between the
puppet of corn-stalks on the sunny stubble-field and the
marble divinity in the shady coolness of the temple. Still
the writings even of these town-bred and cultured persons
afford us an occasional glimpse of a Demeter as rude as the
rudest that a remote German village can shew. Thus
the story that Iasion begat a child Plutus (<q>wealth,</q>
<q>abundance</q>) by Demeter on a thrice-ploughed field,<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, v. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Theog.</hi> 969 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> may
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
be compared with the West Prussian custom of the mock
birth of a child on the harvest-field.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this Prussian
custom the pretended mother represents the Corn-mother
(<foreign rend='italic'>Žytniamatka</foreign>); the pretended child represents the Corn-baby,
and the whole ceremony is a charm to ensure a crop
next year.<note place='foot'>It is possible that a ceremony
performed in a Cyprian worship of
Ariadne may have been of this nature:
at a certain annual sacrifice a young
man lay down and mimicked a
woman in child-bed. See Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi>, 20:
ἐν δὴ τῇ θυσίᾳ τοῦ
Γορπιαίου μηνὸς ἰσταμένου δευτέρᾳ κατακλινόμενόν
τινα τῶν νεανίσκων φθέγγεσθαι
καὶ ποιεῖν ἅπερ ὠδινοῦσαι γυναῖκες. We
have already seen grounds for regarding
Ariadne as a goddess or spirit of vegetation.
See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 138. Amongst
the Minnitarees in North America, the
Prince of Neuwied saw a tall strong
woman pretend to bring up a stalk of
maize out of her stomach; the object
of the ceremony was to secure a good
crop of maize in the following year.
See Maximilian, Prinz zu Wied, <hi rend='italic'>Reise
in das innere Nord-America</hi> (Coblenz,
1839-1841), ii. 269.</note> The custom and the legend alike point to an
older practice of performing, among the sprouting crops in
spring or the stubble in autumn, one of those real or mimic
acts of procreation by which, as we have seen, primitive
man often seeks to infuse his own vigorous life into the
languid or decaying energies of nature.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Another glimpse
of the savage under the civilised Demeter will be afforded
farther on, when we come to deal with another aspect of
these agricultural divinities.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Why did
the Greeks
personify
the corn as
a mother
and a
daughter?</note>
The reader may have observed that in modern folk-customs
the corn-spirit is generally represented either by a
Corn-mother (Old Woman, etc.) or by a Maiden (Harvest-child,
etc.), not both by a Corn-mother and by a Maiden.
Why then did the Greeks represent the corn both as a
mother and a daughter?
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Demeter
was perhaps
the
ripe crop
and Persephone
the seed-corn.</note>
In the Breton custom the mother-sheaf&mdash;a large figure
made out of the last sheaf with a small corn-doll inside of
it&mdash;clearly represents both the Corn-mother and the Corn-daughter,
the latter still unborn.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</note> Again, in the Prussian
custom just referred to, the woman who plays the part of
Corn-mother represents the ripe grain; the child appears to
represent next year's corn, which may be regarded, naturally
enough, as the child of this year's corn, since it is from the
seed of this year's harvest that next year's crop will spring.
Further, we have seen that among the Malays of the Peninsula
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
and sometimes among the Highlanders of Scotland the spirit
of the grain is represented in double female form, both as old
and young, by means of ears taken alike from the ripe crop:
in Scotland the old spirit of the corn appears as the Carline
or <foreign lang='gd' rend='italic'>Cailleach</foreign>, the young spirit as the Maiden; while among
the Malays of the Peninsula the two spirits of the rice are
definitely related to each other as mother and child.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Judged
by these analogies Demeter would be the ripe crop of this
year; Persephone would be the seed-corn taken from it and
sown in autumn, to reappear in spring.<note place='foot'>However, the Sicilians seem on the
contrary to have regarded Demeter as
the seed-corn and Persephone as the
ripe crop. See above, pp. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The descent of
Persephone into the lower world would thus be a mythical
expression for the sowing of the seed; her reappearance in
spring would signify the sprouting of the young corn. In
this way the Persephone of one year becomes the Demeter
of the next, and this may very well have been the original
form of the myth. But when with the advance of religious
thought the corn came to be personified, no longer as a
being that went through the whole cycle of birth, growth,
reproduction, and death within a year, but as an immortal
goddess, consistency required that one of the two personifications,
the mother or the daughter, should be sacrificed.
However, the double conception of the corn as mother and
daughter may have been too old and too deeply rooted in
the popular mind to be eradicated by logic, and so room
had to be found in the reformed myth both for mother
and daughter. This was done by assigning to Persephone
the character of the corn sown in autumn and sprouting in
spring, while Demeter was left to play the somewhat vague
part of the heavy mother of the corn, who laments its annual
disappearance underground, and rejoices over its reappearance
in spring. Thus instead of a regular succession of
divine beings, each living a year and then giving birth to her
successor, the reformed myth exhibits the conception of two
divine and immortal beings, one of whom annually disappears
into and reappears from the ground, while the other has little
to do but to weep and rejoice at the appropriate seasons.<note place='foot'>According to Augustine (<hi rend='italic'>De civitate
Dei</hi>, iv. 8) the Romans imagined
a whole series of distinct deities, mostly
goddesses, who took charge of the corn
at all its various stages from the time
when it was committed to the ground
to the time when it was lodged in the
granary. Such a multiplication of
mythical beings to account for the
process of growth is probably late
rather than early.</note>
</p>

<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Or the
Greeks
may have
started
with the
personification
of
the corn as
a single
goddess,
and the
conception
of a second
goddess
may have
been a
later
development. Duplication
of
deities as
a consequence
of the
anthropomorphic
tendency.
Example
of such
duplication
in Japan,
where there
are two
distinct
deities of
the sun. Perhaps
the Greek
personification
of
the corn as
a mother
and a
daughter
(Demeter
and Persephone)
is a
case of such
a mythical
duplication.</note>
This theory of the double personification of the corn
in Greek myth assumes that both personifications (Demeter
and Persephone) are original. But if we suppose that the
Greek myth started with a single personification, the after-growth
of a second personification may perhaps be explained
as follows. On looking over the harvest customs which have
been passed under review, it may be noticed that they involve
two distinct conceptions of the corn-spirit. For whereas in
some of the customs the corn-spirit is treated as immanent in
the corn, in others it is regarded as external to it. Thus
when a particular sheaf is called by the name of the corn-spirit,
and is dressed in clothes and handled with reverence,<note place='foot'>In some places it was customary
to kneel down before the last sheaf, in
others to kiss it. See W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Korndämonen</hi>, p. 26; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 339. The
custom of kneeling and bowing before
the last corn is said to have been
observed, at least occasionally, in
England. See <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii.
(1888) p. 270; and Herrick's evidence,
above, p. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, note 1. The Malay
sorceress who cut the seven ears of
rice to form the Rice-child kissed the
ears after she had cut them (W. W.
Skeat, <hi rend='italic'>Malay Magic</hi>, p. 241).</note>
the spirit is clearly regarded as immanent in the corn. But
when the spirit is said to make the crops grow by passing
through them, or to blight the grain of those against whom
she has a grudge,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> she is apparently conceived as distinct
from, though exercising power over, the corn. Conceived in
the latter way the corn-spirit is in a fair way to become a
deity of the corn, if she has not become so already. Of
these two conceptions, that of the corn-spirit as immanent in
the corn is doubtless the older, since the view of nature as
animated by indwelling spirits appears to have generally
preceded the view of it as controlled by external deities;
to put it shortly, animism precedes deism. In the harvest
customs of our European peasantry the corn-spirit seems
to be conceived now as immanent in the corn and now as
external to it. In Greek mythology, on the other hand,
Demeter is viewed rather as the deity of the corn than as the
spirit immanent in it.<note place='foot'>Even in one of the oldest documents,
the Homeric <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>,
Demeter is represented as the goddess
who controls the growth of the corn
rather than as the spirit who is immanent
in it. See above, pp. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The process of thought which leads
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
to the change from the one mode of conception to the other
is anthropomorphism, or the gradual investment of the immanent
spirits with more and more of the attributes of
humanity. As men emerge from savagery the tendency to
humanise their divinities gains strength; and the more
human these become the wider is the breach which severs
them from the natural objects of which they were at first
merely the animating spirits or souls. But in the progress
upwards from savagery men of the same generation do
not march abreast; and though the new anthropomorphic
gods may satisfy the religious wants of the more developed
intelligences, the backward members of the community will
cling by preference to the old animistic notions. Now when
the spirit of any natural object such as the corn has been
invested with human qualities, detached from the object, and
converted into a deity controlling it, the object itself is, by
the withdrawal of its spirit, left inanimate; it becomes, so to
say, a spiritual vacuum. But the popular fancy, intolerant
of such a vacuum, in other words, unable to conceive anything
as inanimate, immediately creates a fresh mythical
being, with which it peoples the vacant object. Thus the
same natural object comes to be represented in mythology
by two distinct beings: first by the old spirit now separated
from it and raised to the rank of a deity; second, by the
new spirit, freshly created by the popular fancy to supply
the place vacated by the old spirit on its elevation to a
higher sphere. For example, in Japanese religion the solar
character of Ama-terasu, the great goddess of the Sun, has
become obscured, and accordingly the people have personified
the sun afresh under the name of <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>Nichi-rin sama</foreign>, <q>sun-wheeling
personage,</q> and <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>O tentō sama</foreign>, <q>august-heaven-path-personage</q>;
to the lower class of Japanese at the
present day, especially to women and children, <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>O tentō sama</foreign>
is the actual sun, sexless, mythless, and unencumbered by
any formal worship, yet looked up to as a moral being who
rewards the good, punishes the wicked, and enforces oaths
made in his name.<note place='foot'>W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi> (London, 1905), p. 127.</note> In such cases the problem for mythology
is, having got two distinct personifications of the same object,
what to do with them? How are their relations to each other
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
to be adjusted, and room found for both in the mythological
system? When the old spirit or new deity is conceived as
creating or producing the object in question, the problem is
easily solved. Since the object is believed to be produced
by the old spirit, and animated by the new one, the latter, as
the soul of the object, must also owe its existence to the
former; thus the old spirit will stand to the new one as producer
to produced, that is, in mythology, as parent to child,
and if both spirits are conceived as female, their relation will
be that of mother and daughter. In this way, starting from
a single personification of the corn as female, mythic fancy
might in time reach a double personification of it as mother
and daughter. It would be very rash to affirm that this was
the way in which the myth of Demeter and Persephone
actually took shape; but it seems a legitimate conjecture
that the reduplication of deities, of which Demeter and
Persephone furnish an example, may sometimes have arisen
in the way indicated. For example, among the pairs of
deities dealt with in a former part of this work, it has been
shewn that there are grounds for regarding both Isis and her
companion god Osiris as personifications of the corn.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 330 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 346
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On
the hypothesis just suggested, Isis would be the old corn-spirit,
and Osiris would be the newer one, whose relationship
to the old spirit was variously explained as that of brother,
husband, and son;<note place='foot'>A. Pauly, <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie der
classischen Alterthumswissenschaft</hi>, v.
(Stuttgart, 1849) p. 1011.</note> for of course mythology would always
be free to account for the coexistence of the two divinities
in more ways than one. It must not, however, be forgotten
that this proposed explanation of such pairs of deities as
Demeter and Persephone or Isis and Osiris is purely conjectural,
and is only given for what it is worth.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Lityerses.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Songs of the Corn Reapers.'/>
<head>§ 1. Songs of the Corn Reapers.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Death and
resurrection
a
leading
incident in
the myth
of Persephone,
as in the
myths of
Adonis,
Attis,
Osiris, and
Dionysus.</note>
In the preceding pages an attempt has been made to shew
that in the Corn-mother and Harvest-maiden of Northern
Europe we have the prototypes of Demeter and Persephone.
But an essential feature is still wanting to complete the
resemblance. A leading incident in the Greek myth is the
death and resurrection of Persephone; it is this incident
which, coupled with the nature of the goddess as a deity of
vegetation, links the myth with the cults of Adonis, Attis,
Osiris, and Dionysus; and it is in virtue of this incident
that the myth finds a place in our discussion of the Dying
God. It remains, therefore, to see whether the conception
of the annual death and resurrection of a god, which figures
so prominently in these great Greek and Oriental worships,
has not also its origin or its analogy in the rustic rites
observed by reapers and vine-dressers amongst the corn-shocks
and the vines.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Popular
harvest
and vintage
customs in
ancient
Egypt,
Syria, and
Phrygia.</note>
Our general ignorance of the popular superstitions and
customs of the ancients has already been confessed. But
the obscurity which thus hangs over the first beginnings of
ancient religion is fortunately dissipated to some extent in
the present case. The worships of Osiris, Adonis, and Attis
had their respective seats, as we have seen, in Egypt, Syria,
and Phrygia; and in each of these countries certain harvest
and vintage customs are known to have been observed, the
resemblance of which to each other and to the national rites
struck the ancients themselves, and, compared with the
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
harvest customs of modern peasants and barbarians, seems
to throw some light on the origin of the rites in question.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Maneros,
a plaintive
song of
Egyptian
reapers.</note>
It has been already mentioned, on the authority of
Diodorus, that in ancient Egypt the reapers were wont to
lament over the first sheaf cut, invoking Isis as the goddess
to whom they owed the discovery of corn.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 14, ἔτι γὰρ
καὶ νῦν κατὰ τὸν θερισμὸν τοὺς πρώτους
ἀμηθέντας στάχυς θέντας τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
κόπτεσθαι πλησίον τοῦ δράγματοσ καὶ τὴν
Ἶσιν ἀνακαλεῖσθαι κτλ. For θέντας
we should perhaps read σύνθεντας,
which is supported by the following
δράγματος.</note> To the plaintive
song or cry sung or uttered by Egyptian reapers the Greeks
gave the name of Maneros, and explained the name by a
story that Maneros, the only son of the first Egyptian king,
invented agriculture, and, dying an untimely death, was thus
lamented by the people.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 79; Julius Pollux, iv.
54; Pausanias, ix. 29. 7; Athenaeus,
xiv. 11, p. 620 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> It appears, however, that the name
Maneros is due to a misunderstanding of the formula
<foreign rend='italic'>mââ-ne-hra</foreign>, <q>Come to the house,</q> which has been discovered
in various Egyptian writings, for example in the dirge of
Isis in the Book of the Dead.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Adonisklage und
das Linoslied</hi> (Berlin, 1852), p. 24.
According to another interpretation,
however, Maneros is the Egyptian
<foreign rend='italic'>manurosh</foreign>, <q>Let us be merry.</q> See
Lauth, <q>Über den ägyptischen
Maneros,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte der königl.
bayer.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Akademie der Wissenschaften
zu München</hi>, 1869, ii. 163-194.</note> Hence we may suppose that
the cry <foreign rend='italic'>mââ-ne-hra</foreign> was chanted by the reapers over the cut
corn as a dirge for the death of the corn-spirit (Isis or Osiris)
and a prayer for its return. As the cry was raised over the
first ears reaped, it would seem that the corn-spirit was
believed by the Egyptians to be present in the first corn
cut and to die under the sickle. We have seen that in the
Malay Peninsula and Java the first ears of rice are taken to
represent either the Soul of the Rice or the Rice-bride and
the Rice-bridegroom.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In parts of Russia the first sheaf is
treated much in the same way that the last sheaf is treated
elsewhere. It is reaped by the mistress herself, taken home
and set in the place of honour near the holy pictures; afterwards
it is threshed separately, and some of its grain is
mixed with the next year's seed-corn.<note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi> (London, 1872), pp.
249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Aberdeenshire,
while the last corn cut was generally used to make the
<foreign rend='italic'>clyack</foreign> sheaf,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> it was sometimes, though rarely, the first corn
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
cut that was dressed up as a woman and carried home with
ceremony.<note place='foot'>W. Gregor, <q>Quelques coutumes
du Nord-est du comté d'Aberdeen,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions populaires</hi>, iii.
(1888) p. 487 (should be 535).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Linus or
Ailinus, a
plaintive
song sung
at the
vintage in
Phoenicia.</note>
In Phoenicia and Western Asia a plaintive song, like
that chanted by the Egyptian corn-reapers, was sung at the
vintage and probably (to judge by analogy) also at harvest.
This Phoenician song was called by the Greeks Linus or
Ailinus and explained, like Maneros, as a lament for the
death of a youth named Linus.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xviii. 570; Herodotus,
ii. 79; Pausanias, ix. 29. 6-9;
Conon, <hi rend='italic'>Narrat</hi>. 19. For the form
Ailinus see Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>; Euripides,
<hi rend='italic'>Orestes</hi>, 1395; Sophocles, <hi rend='italic'>Ajax</hi>, 627.
Compare Moschus, <hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> iii. 1;
Callimachus, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Apollo</hi>, 20.
See Greve, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Linos,</q> in W. H.
Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Ausführliches Lexikon der
griech, und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 2053
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> According to one story
Linus was brought up by a shepherd, but torn to pieces by
his dogs.<note place='foot'>Conon, <hi rend='italic'>Narrat.</hi> 19.</note> But, like Maneros, the name Linus or Ailinus
appears to have originated in a verbal misunderstanding, and
to be nothing more than the cry <foreign rend='italic'>ai lanu</foreign>, that is <q>Woe to us,</q>
which the Phoenicians probably uttered in mourning for
Adonis;<note place='foot'>F. C. Movers, <hi rend='italic'>Die Phönizier</hi>, i.
(Bonn, 1841), p. 246; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi> (Berlin,
1877), p. 281. In Hebrew the expression
would be <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>oï lanu</foreign> (אוי לנו),
which occurs in 1 Samuel, iv. 7 and 8;
Jeremiah, iv. 13, vi. 4. However,
the connexion of the Linus song with
the lament for Adonis is regarded by
Baudissin as very doubtful. See W.
W. Graf Baudissin, <hi rend='italic'>Adonis und
Esmun</hi> (Leipsic, 1911), p. 360, note 3.</note> at least Sappho seems to have regarded Adonis
and Linus as equivalent.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ix. 29. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Bormus, a
plaintive
song sung
by Mariandynian
reapers in
Bithynia.</note>
In Bithynia a like mournful ditty, called Bormus or
Borimus, was chanted by Mariandynian reapers. Bormus
was said to have been a handsome youth, the son of King
Upias or of a wealthy and distinguished man. One summer
day, watching the reapers at work in his fields, he went to
fetch them a drink of water and was never heard of more.
So the reapers sought for him, calling him in plaintive
strains, which they continued to chant at harvest ever afterwards.<note place='foot'>Julius Pollux, iv. 54; Athenaeus,
xiv. 11, pp. 619 <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>-620 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; Hesychius,
<hi rend='italic'>svv.</hi> Βῶρμον and Μαριανουνὸς θρῆνος.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Killing the Corn-spirit.'/>
<head>§ 2. Killing the Corn-spirit.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lityerses,
a song
sung at
reaping
and
threshing
in Phrygia.
Legend of
Lityerses.</note>
In Phrygia the corresponding song, sung by harvesters
both at reaping and at threshing, was called Lityerses.
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
According to one story, Lityerses was a bastard son of
Midas, King of Phrygia, and dwelt at Celaenae. He
used to reap the corn, and had an enormous appetite.
When a stranger happened to enter the corn-field or to
pass by it, Lityerses gave him plenty to eat and drink,
then took him to the corn-fields on the banks of the
Maeander and compelled him to reap along with him.
Lastly, it was his custom to wrap the stranger in a sheaf,
cut off his head with a sickle, and carry away his
body, swathed in the corn stalks. But at last Hercules
undertook to reap with him, cut off his head with the
sickle, and threw his body into the river.<note place='foot'>The story was told by Sositheus in
his play of <hi rend='italic'>Daphnis</hi>. His verses have
been preserved in the tract of an
anonymous writer. See <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores
rerum mirabilium Graeci</hi>, ed. A.
Westermann (Brunswick, 1839), pp.
220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; also Athenaeus, x. 8, p.
415 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Scholiast on Theocritus, x.
41; Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, Suidas, and
Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Lityerses</q>; Apostolius,
<hi rend='italic'>Centur.</hi> x. 74; Servius, on Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Bucol.</hi> viii. 68. Photius mentions the
sickle with which Lityerses beheaded
his victims. Servius calls Lityerses a
king and says that Hercules cut off his
head with the sickle that had been given
him to reap with. Lityerses is the subject
of a special study by W. Mannhardt
(<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>),
whom I follow. Compare O. Crusius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Lityerses,</q> in W. H. Roscher's
<hi rend='italic'>Ausführliches Lexikon der griech. und
röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 2065 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> As Hercules
is reported to have slain Lityerses in the same way that
Lityerses slew others (as Theseus treated Sinis and Sciron),
we may infer that Lityerses used to throw the bodies of his
victims into the river. According to another version of the
story, Lityerses, a son of Midas, was wont to challenge
people to a reaping match with him, and if he vanquished
them he used to thrash them; but one day he met with a
stronger reaper, who slew him.<note place='foot'>Julius Pollux, iv. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
story of
Lityerses
seems to
reflect
an old
Phrygian
harvest
custom of
killing
strangers
as embodiments
of
the corn-spirit.</note>
There are some grounds for supposing that in these
stories of Lityerses we have the description of a Phrygian
harvest custom in accordance with which certain persons,
especially strangers passing the harvest field, were regularly
regarded as embodiments of the corn-spirit, and as such were
seized by the reapers, wrapt in sheaves, and beheaded, their
bodies, bound up in the corn-stalks, being afterwards thrown
into water as a rain-charm. The grounds for this supposition
are, first, the resemblance of the Lityerses story to
the harvest customs of European peasantry, and, second, the
frequency of human sacrifices offered by savage races to
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
promote the fertility of the fields. We will examine these
grounds successively, beginning with the former.
</p>

<p>
In comparing the story with the harvest customs of
Europe,<note place='foot'>In this comparison I closely follow
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>,
pp. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> three points deserve special attention, namely: I. the
reaping match and the binding of persons in the sheaves; II. the
killing of the corn-spirit or his representatives; III. the treatment
of visitors to the harvest field or of strangers passing it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Contests
among
reapers,
binders,
and
threshers
in order
not to be
the last at
their work.</note>
I. In regard to the first head, we have seen that in
modern Europe the person who cuts or binds or threshes the
last sheaf is often exposed to rough treatment at the hands
of his fellow-labourers. For example, he is bound up in the
last sheaf, and, thus encased, is carried or carted about,
beaten, drenched with water, thrown on a dunghill, and so
forth. Or, if he is spared this horseplay, he is at least
the subject of ridicule or is thought to be destined to suffer
some misfortune in the course of the year. Hence the
harvesters are naturally reluctant to give the last cut at
reaping or the last stroke at threshing or to bind the last
sheaf, and towards the close of the work this reluctance
produces an emulation among the labourers, each striving
to finish his task as fast as possible, in order that he
may escape the invidious distinction of being last.<note place='foot'>Compare above, pp. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>,
<ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>,
<ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the other
hand, the last sheaf is sometimes an
object of desire and emulation. See
above, pp. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> note 3, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>. It is so at
Balquhidder also (<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>,
vi. 269); and it was formerly so on
the Gareloch, Dumbartonshire, where
there was a competition for the honour
of cutting it, and handfuls of standing
corn used to be hidden under sheaves
in order that the last to be uncovered
should form the Maiden.&mdash;(From the
information of Archie Leitch. See
pp. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)</note> For
example, in the neighbourhood of Danzig, when the winter
corn is cut and mostly bound up in sheaves, the portion
which still remains to be bound is divided amongst the
women binders, each of whom receives a swath of equal
length to bind. A crowd of reapers, children, and idlers
gather round to witness the contest, and at the word, <q>Seize
the Old Man,</q> the women fall to work, all binding their
allotted swaths as hard as they can. The spectators watch
them narrowly, and the woman who cannot keep pace with
the rest and consequently binds the last sheaf has to carry
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
the Old Man (that is, the last sheaf made up in the form of
a man) to the farmhouse and deliver it to the farmer with
the words, <q>Here I bring you the Old Man.</q> At the supper
which follows, the Old Man is placed at the table and receives
an abundant portion of food, which, as he cannot eat it, falls
to the share of the woman who carried him. Afterwards the
Old Man is placed in the yard and all the people dance
round him. Or the woman who bound the last sheaf dances
for a good while with the Old Man, while the rest form a
ring round them; afterwards they all, one after the other,
dance a single round with him. Further, the woman who
bound the last sheaf goes herself by the name of the Old
Man till the next harvest, and is often mocked with the cry,
<q>Here comes the Old Man.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Mittelmark district of
Prussia, when the rye has been reaped, and the last sheaves
are about to be tied up, the binders stand in two rows
facing each other, every woman with her sheaf and her
straw rope before her. At a given signal they all tie up
their sheaves, and the one who is the last to finish is ridiculed
by the rest. Not only so, but her sheaf is made up into
human shape and called the Old Man, and she must
carry it home to the farmyard, where the harvesters dance in
a circle round her and it. Then they take the Old Man
to the farmer and deliver it to him with the words, <q>We
bring the Old Man to the Master. He may keep him till
he gets a new one.</q> After that the Old Man is set up
against a tree, where he remains for a long time, the butt of
many jests.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 342.</note> At Aschbach in Bavaria, when the reaping is
nearly finished, the reapers say, <q>Now, we will drive out the
Old Man.</q> Each of them sets himself to reap a patch of
corn as fast as he can; he who cuts the last handful or the
last stalk is greeted by the rest with an exulting cry, <q>You
have the Old Man.</q> Sometimes a black mask is fastened on
the reaper's face and he is dressed in woman's clothes; or if
the reaper is a woman, she is dressed in man's clothes. A
dance follows. At the supper the Old Man gets twice as
large a portion of food as the others. The proceedings are
similar at threshing; the person who gives the last stroke is
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
said to have the Old Man. At the supper given to the
threshers he has to eat out of the cream-ladle and to drink a
great deal. Moreover, he is quizzed and teased in all sorts
of ways till he frees himself from further annoyance by
treating the others to brandy or beer.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 20; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag
zur deutschen Mythologie</hi> (Munich,
1848-1855), ii. p. 217, § 397; A. Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna, 1878), p. 222,
§ 69.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom of
wrapping
up in
corn-stalks
the last
reaper,
binder, or
thresher.</note>
These examples illustrate the contests in reaping, threshing,
and binding which take place amongst the harvesters,
from their unwillingness to suffer the ridicule and discomfort
incurred by the one who happens to finish his work last. It
will be remembered that the person who is last at reaping,
binding, or threshing, is regarded as the representative of
the corn-spirit,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and this idea is more fully expressed by
binding him or her in corn-stalks. The latter custom has
been already illustrated, but a few more instances may be
added. At Kloxin, near Stettin, the harvesters call out to
the woman who binds the last sheaf, <q>You have the Old
Man, and must keep him.</q> The Old Man is a great bundle
of corn decked with flowers and ribbons, and fashioned into
a rude semblance of the human form. It is fastened on a
rake or strapped on a horse, and brought with music to the
village. In delivering the Old Man to the farmer, the
woman says:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Here, dear Sir, is the Old Man.</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>He can stay no longer on the field,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>He can hide himself no longer,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>He must come into the village.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ladies and gentlemen, pray be so kind</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>As to give the Old Man a present.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As late as the first half of the nineteenth century the
custom was to tie up the woman herself in pease-straw, and
bring her with music to the farmhouse, where the harvesters
danced with her till the pease-straw fell off.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 22.</note> In other
villages round Stettin, when the last harvest-waggon is being
loaded, there is a regular race amongst the women, each
striving not to be last. For she who places the last sheaf
on the waggon is called the Old Man, and is completely
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
swathed in corn-stalks; she is also decked with flowers, and
flowers and a helmet of straw are placed on her head. In
solemn procession she carries the harvest-crown to the squire,
over whose head she holds it while she utters a string of
good wishes. At the dance which follows, the Old Man
has the right to choose his, or rather her, partner; it is an
honour to dance with him.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 22.</note> At Blankenfelde, in the district
of Potsdam, the woman who binds the last sheaf at the rye-harvest
is saluted with the cry, <q>You have the Old Man.</q>
A woman is then tied up in the last sheaf in such a way
that only her head is left free; her hair also is covered with
a cap made of rye-stalks, adorned with ribbons and flowers.
She is called the Harvest-man, and must keep dancing in
front of the last harvest-waggon till it reaches the squire's
house, where she receives a present and is released from her
envelope of corn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Gommern, near Magdeburg, the
reaper who cuts the last ears of corn is often wrapt up in
corn-stalks so completely that it is hard to see whether
there is a man in the bundle or not. Thus wrapt up he is
taken by another stalwart reaper on his back, and carried
round the field amidst the joyous cries of the harvesters.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 23.</note>
At Neuhausen, near Merseburg, the person who binds the
last sheaf is wrapt in ears of oats and saluted as the Oats-man,
whereupon the others dance round him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Brie, Isle
de France, the farmer himself is tied up in the <emph>first</emph> sheaf.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 24.</note>
At the harvest-home at Udvarhely, Transylvania, a person
is encased in corn-stalks, and wears on his head a crown
made out of the last ears cut. On reaching the village he is
soused with water over and over.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 24.</note> At Dingelstedt, in the
district of Erfurt, down to the first half of the nineteenth
century it was the custom to tie up a man in the last sheaf.
He was called the Old Man, and was brought home on the
last waggon, amid huzzas and music. On reaching the farmyard
he was rolled round the barn and drenched with water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 24.</note>
At Nördlingen in Bavaria the man who gives the last stroke
at threshing is wrapt in straw and rolled on the
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
threshing-floor.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts of Oberpfalz, Bavaria, he is said to
<q>get the Old Man,</q> is wrapt in straw, and carried to a
neighbour who has not yet finished his threshing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 25.</note> In Silesia
the woman who binds the last sheaf has to submit to a good
deal of horse-play. She is pushed, knocked down, and tied
up in the sheaf, after which she is called the corn-puppet
(<foreign rend='italic'>Kornpopel</foreign>).<note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 65.</note> In Thüringen a sausage is stuck in the last
sheaf at threshing, and thrown, with the sheaf, on the
threshing-floor. It is called the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Barrenwurst</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bazenwurst</foreign>,
and is eaten by all the threshers. After they have eaten it a
man is encased in pease-straw, and thus attired is led through
the village.<note place='foot'>A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 223, § 70.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit,
driven
out of the
last corn,
lives in the
barn during
the
winter.</note>
<q>In all these cases the idea is that the spirit of the
corn&mdash;the Old Man of vegetation&mdash;is driven out of the corn
last cut or last threshed, and lives in the barn during the
winter. At sowing-time he goes out again to the fields to
resume his activity as animating force among the sprouting
corn.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
ideas as to
the last
corn in
India.</note>
Ideas of the same sort appear to attach to the last corn
in India. At Hoshangábád, in Central India, when the reaping
is nearly done, a patch of corn, about a rood in extent, is left
standing in the cultivator's last field, and the reapers rest a little.
Then they rush at this remnant, tear it up, and cast it into the
air, shouting victory to one or other of the local gods, according
to their religious persuasion. A sheaf is made out of this
corn, tied to a bamboo, set up in the last harvest cart, and
carried home in triumph. Here it is fastened up in the
threshing-floor or attached to a tree or to the cattle-shed,
where its services are held to be essential for the purpose of
averting the evil-eye.<note place='foot'>C. A. Elliot, <hi rend='italic'>Hoshangábád Settlement
Report</hi>, p. 178, quoted in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab
Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. §§ 8, 168 (October
and December, 1885); W. Crooke,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern
India</hi> (Westminster, 1896), ii. 306.</note> A like custom prevails in the eastern
districts of the North-Western Provinces of India. Sometimes
a little patch is left untilled as a refuge for the field-spirit;
sometimes it is sown, and when the corn of this patch has
been reaped with a rush and a shout, it is presented to the
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
priest, who offers it to the local gods or bestows it on a
beggar.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
supposed
to
be killed at
reaping or
threshing. Corn-spirit
represented
by
a man,
who is
threshed.</note>
II. Passing to the second point of comparison between
the Lityerses story and European harvest customs, we have
now to see that in the latter the corn-spirit is often believed
to be killed at reaping or threshing. In the Romsdal and
other parts of Norway, when the haymaking is over, the
people say that <q>the Old Hay-man has been killed.</q> In
some parts of Bavaria the man who gives the last stroke
at threshing is said to have killed the Corn-man, the Oats-man,
or the Wheat-man, according to the crop.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 31.</note> In the
Canton of Tillot, in Lothringen, at threshing the last corn
the men keep time with their flails, calling out as they
thresh, <q>We are killing the Old Woman! We are killing
the Old Woman!</q> If there is an old woman in the house
she is warned to save herself, or she will be struck dead.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 334.</note>
Near Ragnit, in Lithuania, the last handful of corn is left
standing by itself, with the words, <q>The Old Woman (<foreign rend='italic'>Boba</foreign>)
is sitting in there.</q> Then a young reaper whets his scythe,
and, with a strong sweep, cuts down the handful. It is now
said of him that <q>he has cut off the Boba's head</q>; and he
receives a gratuity from the farmer and a jugful of water over
his head from the farmer's wife.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 330.</note> According to another
account, every Lithuanian reaper makes haste to finish his
task; for the Old Rye-woman lives in the last stalks, and
whoever cuts the last stalks kills the Old Rye-woman, and by
killing her he brings trouble on himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> In Wilkischken, in
the district of Tilsit, the man who cuts the last corn goes by
the name of <q>the killer of the Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 331.</note> In Lithuania,
again, the corn-spirit is believed to be killed at threshing as
well as at reaping. When only a single pile of corn remains
to be threshed, all the threshers suddenly step back a few
paces, as if at the word of command. Then they fall to work,
plying their flails with the utmost rapidity and vehemence,
till they come to the last bundle. Upon this they fling
themselves with almost frantic fury, straining every nerve,
and raining blows on it till the word <q>Halt!</q> rings out
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
sharply from the leader. The man whose flail is the last to
fall after the command to stop has been given is immediately
surrounded by all the rest, crying out that <q>he has struck
the Old Rye-woman dead.</q> He has to expiate the deed by
treating them to brandy; and, like the man who cuts the
last corn, he is known as <q>the killer of the Old Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 335.</note>
Sometimes in Lithuania the slain corn-spirit was
represented by a puppet. Thus a female figure was made
out of corn-stalks, dressed in clothes, and placed on the
threshing-floor, under the heap of corn which was to be
threshed last. Whoever thereafter gave the last stroke at
threshing <q>struck the Old Woman dead.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 335.</note> We have already
met with examples of burning the figure which represents
the corn-spirit.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</note> In the East Riding of Yorkshire a custom
called <q>burning the Old Witch</q> is observed on the last day
of harvest. A small sheaf of corn is burnt on the field in a
fire of stubble; peas are parched at the fire and eaten with
a liberal allowance of ale; and the lads and lasses romp
about the flames and amuse themselves by blackening each
other's faces.<note place='foot'>J. Nicholson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of East
Yorkshire</hi> (London, Hull, and Driffield,
1890), p. 28, supplemented by a
letter of the author's addressed to Mr.
E. S. Hartland and dated 33 Leicester
Street, Hull, 11th September,
1890. I have to thank Mr. E. S.
Hartland for calling my attention to
the custom and allowing me to see
Mr. Nicholson's letter.</note> Sometimes, again, the corn-spirit is represented
by a man, who lies down under the last corn;
it is threshed upon his body, and the people say that
<q>the Old Man is being beaten to death.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 26.</note> We saw that
sometimes the farmer's wife is thrust, together with the last
sheaf, under the threshing-machine, as if to thresh her, and
that afterwards a pretence is made of winnowing her.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At
Volders, in the Tyrol, husks of corn are stuck behind the
neck of the man who gives the last stroke at threshing, and
he is throttled with a straw garland. If he is tall, it is
believed that the corn will be tall next year. Then he is
tied on a bundle and flung into the river.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 50.</note> In Carinthia,
the thresher who gave the last stroke, and the person who
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
untied the last sheaf on the threshing-floor, are bound hand
and foot with straw bands, and crowns of straw are placed
on their heads. Then they are tied, face to face, on a
sledge, dragged through the village, and flung into a brook.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The custom of throwing the representative of the corn-spirit
into a stream, like that of drenching him with water, is,
as usual, a rain-charm.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> note 1;
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
pp. 195 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Corn-spirit
represented
by
a stranger
or a visitor
to the
harvest-field,
who
is treated
accordingly.</note>
III. Thus far the representatives of the corn-spirit have
generally been the man or woman who cuts, binds, or
threshes the last corn. We now come to the cases in which
the corn-spirit is represented either by a stranger passing
the harvest-field (as in the Lityerses tale), or by a visitor
entering it for the first time. All over Germany it is
customary for the reapers or threshers to lay hold of
passing strangers and bind them with a rope made of
corn-stalks, till they pay a forfeit; and when the farmer
himself or one of his guests enters the field or the threshing-floor
for the first time, he is treated in the same way.
Sometimes the rope is only tied round his arm or his feet
or his neck.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschunge</hi>
pp. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare K.
Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche
aus Meklenburg</hi> (Vienna, 1879-1880),
ii. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch
und Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic,
1903-1906), ii. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. John,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im
deutschen Westböhmen</hi> (Prague, 1905),
p. 193; A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 221, § 61; R. Krause, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten,
Gebräuche und Aberglauben in Westpreussen</hi>
(Berlin, preface dated March,
1904), p. 51; <hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions
populaires</hi>, iii. (1888) p. 598.</note> But sometimes he is regularly swathed in
corn. Thus at Solör in Norway, whoever enters the field,
be he the master or a stranger, is tied up in a sheaf and
must pay a ransom. In the neighbourhood of Soest, when
the farmer visits the flax-pullers for the first time, he is
completely enveloped in flax. Passers-by are also surrounded
by the women, tied up in flax, and compelled to
stand brandy.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Nördlingen strangers are caught with
straw ropes and tied up in a sheaf till they pay a forfeit.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 36.</note>
Among the Germans of Haselberg, in West Bohemia, as soon
as a farmer had given the last corn to be threshed on the
threshing-floor, he was swathed in it and had to redeem
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
himself by a present of cakes.<note place='foot'>A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch, und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>,
(Prague, 1905), p. 194.</note> In Anhalt, when the proprietor
or one of his family, the steward, or even a stranger
enters the harvest-field for the first time after the reaping
has begun, the wife of the chief reaper ties a rope twisted of
corn-ears, or a nosegay made of corn-ears and flowers, to
his arm, and he is obliged to ransom himself by the payment
of a fine.<note place='foot'>O. Hartung, <q>Zur Volkskunde aus
Anhalt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins für
Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) p. 153.</note> In the canton of Putanges, in Normandy, a
pretence of tying up the owner of the land in the last sheaf
of wheat is still practised, or at least was still practised some
quarter of a century ago. The task falls to the women alone.
They throw themselves on the proprietor, seize him by the
arms, the legs, and the body, throw him to the ground, and
stretch him on the last sheaf. Then a show is made of
binding him, and the conditions to be observed at the
harvest-supper are dictated to him. When he has accepted
them, he is released and allowed to get up.<note place='foot'>J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887),
ii. 240 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Brie, Isle
de France, when any one who does not belong to the farm
passes by the harvest-field, the reapers give chase. If they
catch him, they bind him in a sheaf and bite him, one after
the other, in the forehead, crying, <q>You shall carry the key
of the field.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 36.</note> <q>To have the key</q> is an expression used
by harvesters elsewhere in the sense of to cut or bind or
thresh the last sheaf;<note place='foot'>For the evidence, see <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 36,
note 2. The <q>key</q> in the European
custom is probably intended to serve
the same purpose as the <q>knot</q> in
the Cingalese custom, as to which see
<hi rend='italic'>Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</hi>, pp.
308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> hence, it is equivalent to the phrases
<q>You have the Old Man,</q> <q>You are the Old Man,</q> which
are addressed to the cutter, binder, or thresher of the last
sheaf. Therefore, when a stranger, as at Brie, is tied up in
a sheaf and told that he will <q>carry the key of the field,</q> it
is as much as to say that he is the Old Man, that is, an
embodiment of the corn-spirit. In hop-picking, if a well-dressed
stranger passes the hop-yard, he is seized by the
women, tumbled into the bin, covered with leaves, and not
released till he has paid a fine.<note place='foot'>From a letter written to me by
Colonel Henry Wilson, of Farnborough
Lodge, Farnborough, Kent. The
letter is dated 21st March, 1901.</note> In some parts of Scotland,
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
particularly in the counties of Fife and Kinross, down to
recent times the reapers used to seize and dump, as it was
called, any stranger who happened to visit or pass by the
harvest field. The custom was to lay hold of the stranger
by his ankles and armpits, lift him up, and bring the lower
part of his person into violent contact with the ground.
Women as well as men were liable to be thus treated.
The practice of interposing a sheaf between the sufferer
and the ground is said to be a modern refinement.<note place='foot'><q>Notes on Harvest Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) pp. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Comparing
this custom with the one practised at Putanges in
Normandy, which has just been described, we may conjecture
that in Scotland the <q>dumping</q> of strangers on the
harvest-field was originally a preliminary to wrapping them
up in sheaves of corn.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
of the
Tarahumare
Indians
at hoeing,
ploughing,
and
harvest.</note>
Ceremonies of a somewhat similar kind are performed by
the Tarahumare Indians of Mexico not only at harvest but
also at hoeing and ploughing. <q>When the work of hoeing
and weeding is finished, the workers seize the master of the
field, and, tying his arms crosswise behind him, load all the
implements, that is to say, the hoes, upon his back, fastening
them with ropes. Then they form two single columns, the
landlord in the middle between them, and all facing the
house. Thus they start homeward. Simultaneously the
two men at the heads of the columns begin to run rapidly
forward some thirty yards, cross each other, then turn back,
run along the two columns, cross each other again at the rear
and take their places each at the end of his row. As they
pass each other ahead and in the rear of the columns they
beat their mouths with the hollow of their hands and yell.
As soon as they reach their places at the foot, the next pair
in front of the columns starts off, running in the same way,
and thus pair after pair performs the tour, the procession all
the time advancing toward the house. A short distance in
front of it they come to a halt, and are met by two young
men who carry red handkerchiefs tied to sticks like flags.
The father of the family, still tied up and loaded with the
hoes, steps forward alone and kneels down in front of his
house-door. The flag-bearers wave their banners over him,
and the women of the household come out and kneel on
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
their left knees, first toward the east, and after a little while
toward each of the other cardinal points, west, south, and north.
In conclusion the flags are waved in front of the house.
The father then rises and the people untie him, whereupon
he first salutes the women with the usual greeting, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kwīra!</foreign></q>
or <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kwirevá!</foreign></q> Now they all go into the house, and the man
makes a short speech thanking them all for the assistance
they have given him, for how could he have gotten through
his work without them? They have provided him with a
year's life (that is, with the wherewithal to sustain it), and
now he is going to give them tesvino. He gives a drinking-gourd
full to each one in the assembly, and appoints one
man among them to distribute more to all. The same
ceremony is performed after the ploughing and after the
harvesting. On the first occasion the tied man may be
made to carry the yoke of the oxen, on the second he does
not carry anything.</q><note place='foot'>C. Lumholtz, <hi rend='italic'>Unknown Mexico</hi>
(London, 1903), i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The meaning of these Mexican
ceremonies is not clear. Perhaps the custom of tying up
the farmer at hoeing, ploughing, and reaping is a form of
expiation or apology offered to the spirits of the earth, who
are naturally disturbed by agricultural operations.<note place='foot'>Compare <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>,
Second Edition, pp. 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When
the Yabim of Simbang in German New Guinea see that
the taro plants in their fields are putting forth leaves, they
offer sacrifice of sago-broth and pork to the spirits of the
former owners of the land, in order that they may be kindly
disposed and not do harm but let the fruits ripen.<note place='foot'>K. Vetter, <hi rend='italic'>Komm herüber und hilf
uns!</hi> Heft 2 (Barmen, 1898), p. 7.</note>
Similarly when the Alfoors or Toradjas of Central Celebes
are planting a new field, they offer rice, eggs, and so forth
to the souls of the former owners of the land, hoping that,
mollified by these offerings, the souls will make the crops to
grow and thrive.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Een en ander
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk
leven van den Poso-Alfoer,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xxxix.
(1895) p. 137. As to influence
which the spirits of the dead are
thought to exercise on the growth of
the crops, see above, pp. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, and
below, vol. ii. pp. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> However, this explanation of the Mexican
ceremonies at hoeing, ploughing, and reaping is purely conjectural.
In these ceremonies there is no evidence that, as
in the parallel European customs, the farmer is identified
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
with the corn-spirit, since he is not wrapt up in the
sheaves.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pretence
made by
the reapers
of killing
some one
with their
scythes.</note>
Be that as it may, the evidence adduced above suffices
to prove that, like the ancient Lityerses, modern European
reapers have been wont to lay hold of a passing stranger
and tie him up in a sheaf. It is not to be expected that
they should complete the parallel by cutting off his head;
but if they do not take such a strong step, their language
and gestures are at least indicative of a desire to do so. For
instance, in Mecklenburg on the first day of reaping, if the
master or mistress or a stranger enters the field, or merely
passes by it, all the mowers face towards him and sharpen
their scythes, clashing their whet-stones against them in
unison, as if they were making ready to mow. Then the
woman who leads the mowers steps up to him and ties
a band round his left arm. He must ransom himself by
payment of a forfeit.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, p. 39.</note> Near Ratzeburg, when the master
or other person of mark enters the field or passes by it,
all the harvesters stop work and march towards him in a
body, the men with their scythes in front. On meeting him
they form up in line, men and women. The men stick the
poles of their scythes in the ground, as they do in whetting
them; then they take off their caps and hang them on the
scythes, while their leader stands forward and makes a
speech. When he has done, they all whet their scythes in
measured time very loudly, after which they put on their
caps. Two of the women binders then come forward; one
of them ties the master or stranger (as the case may be)
with corn-ears or with a silken band; the other delivers
a rhyming address. The following are specimens of the
speeches made by the reaper on these occasions. In some
parts of Pomerania every passer-by is stopped, his way being
barred with a corn-rope. The reapers form a circle round
him and sharpen their scythes, while their leader says:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>The men are ready,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The scythes are bent,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The corn is great and small,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>The gentleman must be mowed.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
Then the process of whetting the scythes is repeated.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At
Ramin, in the district of Stettin, the stranger, standing
encircled by the reapers, is thus addressed:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>We'll stroke the gentleman</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>With our naked sword,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wherewith we shear meadows and fields.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>We shear princes and lords.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Labourers are often athirst;</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>If the gentleman will stand beer and brandy</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The joke will soon be over.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>But, if our prayer he does not like,</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>The sword has a right to strike.</hi></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 40. For the speeches made
by the woman who binds the stranger
or the master, see <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 41; C.
Lemke, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</hi>
(Mohrungen, 1884-1887), i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
That in these customs the whetting of the scythes is
really meant as a preliminary to mowing appears from the
following variation of the preceding customs. In the district
of Lüneburg, when any one enters the harvest-field, he is
asked whether he will engage a good fellow. If he says
yes, the harvesters mow some swaths, yelling and screaming,
and then ask him for drink-money.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Pretence
made by
threshers
of choking
a person
with their
flails.</note>
On the threshing-floor strangers are also regarded as
embodiments of the corn-spirit, and are treated accordingly.
At Wiedingharde in Schleswig when a stranger comes to
the threshing-floor he is asked, <q>Shall I teach you the flail-dance?</q>
If he says yes, they put the arms of the threshing-flail
round his neck as if he were a sheaf of corn, and press
them together so tight that he is nearly choked.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 42. See
also above, p. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</note> In some
parishes of Wermland (Sweden), when a stranger enters
the threshing-floor where the threshers are at work, they say
that <q>they will teach him the threshing-song.</q> Then they
put a flail round his neck and a straw rope about his body.
Also, as we have seen, if a stranger woman enters the
threshing-floor, the threshers put a flail round her body and
a wreath of corn-stalks round her neck, and call out, <q>See
the Corn-woman! See! that is how the Corn-maiden
looks!</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 42. See
above, p. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>. In Thüringen a being
called the Rush-cutter (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Binsenschneider</foreign>)
used to be much dreaded. On the
morning of St. John's Day he was wont
to walk through the fields with sickles
tied to his ankles cutting avenues in the
corn as he walked. To detect him,
seven bundles of brushwood were
silently threshed with the flail on the
threshing-floor, and the stranger who
appeared at the door of the barn during
the threshing was the Rush-cutter.
See A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 221. With the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Binsenschneider</foreign>
compare the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bilschneider</foreign> and
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Biberschneider</foreign> (F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi>, Munich, 1848-1855,
ii. pp. 210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, §§ 372-378).</note>
</p>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Custom
observed
at the
madder-harvest
in
Zealand.</note>
In these customs, observed both on the harvest-field and
on the threshing-floor, a passing stranger is regarded as a
personification of the corn, in other words, as the corn-spirit;
and a show is made of treating him like the corn by mowing,
binding, and threshing him. If the reader still doubts
whether European peasants can really regard a passing
stranger in this light, the following custom should set his
doubts at rest. During the madder-harvest in the Dutch
province of Zealand a stranger passing by a field, where the
people are digging the madder-roots, will sometimes call out
to them <foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>Koortspillers</foreign> (a term of reproach). Upon this, two
of the fleetest runners make after him, and, if they catch
him, they bring him back to the madder-field and bury him
in the earth up to his middle at least, jeering at him the
while; then they ease nature before his face.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The spirit
of the corn
conceived
as poor and
robbed
by the
reapers. Some of
the corn
left on the
harvest-field
for the
corn-spirit. Little fields
or gardens
cultivated
for spirits
or gods.</note>
This last act is to be explained as follows. The spirit of
the corn and of other cultivated plants is sometimes conceived,
not as immanent in the plant, but as its owner; hence the cutting
of the corn at harvest, the digging of the roots, and the
gathering of fruit from the fruit-trees are each and all of them
acts of spoliation, which strip him of his property and reduce
him to poverty. Hence he is often known as <q>the Poor
Man</q> or <q>the Poor Woman.</q> Thus in the neighbourhood
of Eisenach a small sheaf is sometimes left standing on the
field for <q>the Poor Old Woman.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 48.</note> At Marksuhl, near
Eisenach, the puppet formed out of the last sheaf is itself
called <q>the Poor Woman.</q> At Alt Lest in Silesia the man
who binds the last sheaf is called the Beggar-man.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In a
village near Roeskilde, in Zealand (Denmark), old-fashioned
peasants sometimes make up the last sheaf into a rude
puppet, which is called the Rye-beggar.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Southern
Schonen the sheaf which is bound last is called the Beggar;
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
it is made bigger than the rest and is sometimes dressed
in clothes. In the district of Olmütz the last sheaf is called
the Beggar; it is given to an old woman, who must carry it
home, limping on one foot.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 49.</note> Sometimes a little of the crop
is left on the field for the spirit, under other names than
<q>the Poor Old Woman.</q> Thus at Szagmanten, a village of
the Tilsit district, the last sheaf was left standing on the
field <q>for the Old Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 337.</note> In Neftenbach (Canton
of Zurich) the first three ears of corn reaped are thrown
away on the field <q>to satisfy the Corn-mother and to make
the next year's crop abundant.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> At Kupferberg, in Bavaria,
some corn is left standing on the field when the rest has
been cut. Of this corn left standing they say that <q>it
belongs to the Old Woman,</q> to whom it is dedicated in the
following words:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>We give it to the Old Woman;</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>She shall keep it.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Next year may she be to us</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>As kind as this time she has been.</hi></q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These words clearly shew that the Old Woman for whom
the corn is left on the field is not a real personage, poor and
hungry, but the mythical Old Woman who makes the corn
to grow. At Schüttarschen, in West Bohemia, after the
crop has been reaped, a few stalks are left standing and a
garland is attached to them. <q>That belongs to the Wood-woman,</q>
they say, and offer a prayer. In this way the
Wood-woman, we are told, has enough to live on through
the winter and the corn will thrive the better next year.
The same thing is done for all the different kinds of corn-crop.<note place='foot'>A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
im deutschen Westböhmen</hi> (Prague,
1905), p. 189.</note>
So in Thüringen, when the after-grass (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Grummet</foreign>) is
being got in, a little heap is left lying on the field; it belongs
to <q>the Little Wood-woman</q> in return for the blessing she
has bestowed.<note place='foot'>A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 224, § 74.</note> In the Frankenwald of Bavaria three handfuls
of flax were left on the field <q>for the Wood-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi> (Munich, 1860-1867),
iii. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
At Lindau in Anhalt the reapers used to leave some stalks
standing in the last corner of the last field for <q>the Corn-woman
to eat.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</hi>,
vii. (1897) p. 154.</note> In some parts of Silesia it was till lately
the custom to leave a few corn-stalks standing in the field,
<q>in order that the next harvest should not fail.</q><note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch, und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 64, § 419.</note> In Russia
it is customary to leave patches of unreaped corn in the fields
and to place bread and salt on the ground near them. <q>These
ears are eventually knotted together, and the ceremony is
called <q>the plaiting of the beard of Volos,</q> and it is supposed
that after it has been performed no wizard or other evilly-disposed
person will be able to hurt the produce of the fields.
The unreaped patch is looked upon as tabooed; and it is
believed that if any one meddles with it he will shrivel up,
and become twisted like the interwoven ears. Similar customs
are kept up in various parts of Russia. Near Kursk and
Voroneje, for instance, a patch of rye is usually left in honour
of the Prophet Elijah, and in another district one of oats is
consecrated to St. Nicholas. As it is well known that both
the Saint and the Prophet have succeeded to the place once
held in the estimation of the Russian people by Perun, it
seems probable that Volos really was, in ancient times, one
of the names of the thunder-god.</q><note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi>, Second Edition
(London, 1872), pp. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to
Perun, the old Slavonic thunder-god,
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 365.</note> In the north-east of
Scotland a few stalks were sometimes left unreaped on the
field for the benefit of <q>the aul' man.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Walter Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on the
Folk-lore of the North-east of Scotland</hi>
(London, 1881), p. 182.</note> Here <q>the aul'
man</q> is probably the equivalent of the harvest Old Man of
Germany.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Among the Mohammedans of Zanzibar it is
customary at sowing a field to reserve a certain portion of it
for the guardian spirits, who at harvest are invited, to the
tuck of drum, to come and take their share; tiny huts are
also built in which food is deposited for their use.<note place='foot'>A. Germain, <q>Note zur Zanzibar
et la Côte Orientale d'Afrique,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), Vème
Série, xvi. (1868) p. 555.</note> In the
island of Nias, to prevent the depredations of wandering
spirits among the rice at harvest, a miniature field is dedicated
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
to them and in it are sown all the plants that grow in the
real fields.<note place='foot'>E. Modigliani, <hi rend='italic'>Un Viaggio a Nías</hi>
(Milan, 1890), p. 593.</note> The Hos, a Ewe tribe of negroes in Togoland,
observe a similar custom for a similar reason. At the entrance
to their yam-fields the traveller may see on both sides of the
path small mounds on which yams, stock-yams, beans, and
maize are planted and appear to flourish with more than
usual luxuriance. These little gardens, tended with peculiar
care, are dedicated to the <q>guardian gods</q> of the owner of
the land; there he cultivates for their benefit the same
plants which he cultivates for his own use in the fields;
and the notion is that the <q>guardian gods</q> will content
themselves with eating the fruits which grow in their little
private preserves and will not poach on the crops which are
destined for human use.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin,
1906), p. 303. In the Central
Provinces of India <q>sometimes the
oldest man in the house cuts the first
five bundles of the crop and they are
afterwards left in the fields for the
birds to eat. And at the end of harvest
the last one or two sheaves are left
standing in the field and any one who
likes can cut and carry them away. In
some localities the last sheaves are left
standing in the field and are known as
<foreign rend='italic'>barhona</foreign>, or the giver of increase. Then
all the labourers rush together at this
last patch of corn and tear it up by the
roots; everybody seizes as much as he
can [and] keeps it, the master having
no share in this patch. After the <foreign rend='italic'>barhona</foreign>
has been torn up all the labourers
fall on their faces to the ground and
worship the field</q> (A. E. Nelson,
<hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces Gazetteers, Bilaspur
District</hi>, vol. A, 1910, p. 75). This
quotation was kindly sent to me by
Mr. W. Crooke; I have not seen the
original. It seems to shew that in the
Central Provinces the last corn is left
standing on the field as a portion for
the corn-spirit, and that he is believed
to be immanent in it; hence the name
of <q>the giver of increase</q> bestowed on
it, and the eagerness with which other
people, though not the owner of the
land, seek to appropriate it.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Hence
perhaps
we may
explain the
dedication
of sacred
fields and
the offering
of first-fruits
to
gods and
spirits.</note>
These customs suggest that the little sacred rice-fields
on which the Kayans of Borneo perform the various
operations of husbandry in mimicry before they address
themselves to the real labours of the field,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> may be dedicated
to the spirits of the rice to compensate them for
the loss they sustain by allowing men to cultivate all
the rest of the land for their own benefit. Perhaps the
Rarian plain at Eleusis<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</note> was a spiritual preserve of the
same kind set apart for the exclusive use of the corn-goddesses
Demeter and Persephone. It may even be that
the law which forbade the Hebrews to reap the corners and
gather the gleanings of the harvest-fields and to strip the
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
vines of their last grapes<note place='foot'>Leviticus, xix. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, xxiii. 22;
Deuteronomy, xxiv. 19-21.</note> was originally intended for the
benefit, not of the human poor, but of the poor spirits of
the corn and the vine, who had just been despoiled by the
reapers and the vintagers, and who, if some provision were
not made for their subsistence, would naturally die of hunger
before another year came round. In providing for their
wants the prudent husbandman was really consulting his
own interests; for how could he expect to reap wheat and
barley and to gather grapes next year if he suffered the
spirits of the corn and of the vine to perish of famine in
the meantime? This train of thought may possibly explain
the wide-spread custom of offering the first-fruits of the
crops to gods or spirits:<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
and below, vol. ii. pp. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> such offerings may have been
originally not so much an expression of gratitude for benefits
received as a means of enabling the benefactors to continue
their benefactions in time to come. Primitive man has
generally a shrewd eye to the main chance: he is more
prone to provide for the future than to sentimentalise over
the past.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Passing
strangers
treated as
the spirit
of the
madder-roots.</note>
Thus when the spirit of vegetation is conceived as
a being who is robbed of his store and impoverished
by the harvesters, it is natural that his representative&mdash;the
passing stranger&mdash;should upbraid them; and it
is equally natural that they should seek to disable him
from pursuing them and recapturing the stolen property.
Now, it is an old superstition that by easing nature on the
spot where a robbery is committed, the robbers secure
themselves, for a certain time, against interruption.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Wuttke,
<hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1869), p. 254, § 400; M. Töppen,
<hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube aus Masuren</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Danzig,
1867), p. 57. The same belief is held
and acted upon in Japan (L. Hearn,
<hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan</hi>, London,
1904, ii. 603).</note> Hence
when madder-diggers resort to this proceeding in presence
of the stranger whom they have caught and buried in the
field, we may infer that they consider themselves robbers
and him as the person robbed. Regarded as such, he must
be the natural owner of the madder-roots, that is, their
spirit or demon; and this conception is carried out by
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
burying him, like the madder-roots, in the ground.<note place='foot'>The explanation of the custom is
W. Mannhardt's (<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>,
p. 49).</note> The
Greeks, it may be observed, were quite familiar with the
idea that a passing stranger may be a god. Homer says
that the gods in the likeness of foreigners roam up and
down cities.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, xvii. 485 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare
Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Sophist</hi>, p. 216 A.</note> Once in Poso, a district of Celebes, when a new
missionary entered a house where a number of people were
gathered round a sick man, one of them addressed the newcomer
in these words: <q>Well, sir, as we had never seen
you before, and you came suddenly in, while we sat here by
ourselves, we thought it was a spirit.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Mijne eerste
ervaringen te Poso,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xxxvi. (1892) p. 402.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Killing
of the
personal
representative
of the
corn-spirit.</note>
Thus in these harvest-customs of modern Europe the
person who cuts, binds, or threshes the last corn is treated as
an embodiment of the corn-spirit by being wrapt up in
sheaves, killed in mimicry by agricultural implements, and
thrown into the water.<note place='foot'>For throwing him into the water,
see p. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>.</note> These coincidences with the
Lityerses story seem to prove that the latter is a genuine
description of an old Phrygian harvest-custom. But since in
the modern parallels the killing of the personal representative
of the corn-spirit is necessarily omitted or at most enacted
only in mimicry, it is desirable to shew that in rude society
human beings have been commonly killed as an agricultural
ceremony to promote the fertility of the fields. The following
examples will make this plain.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Human Sacrifices for the Crops.'/>
<head>§ 3. Human Sacrifices for the Crops.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops in
South and
Central
America.</note>
The Indians of Guayaquil, in Ecuador, used to sacrifice
human blood and the hearts of men when they sowed their
fields.<note place='foot'>Cieza de Leon, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, translated
by C. R. Markham, p. 203
(Hakluyt Society, London, 1864).</note> The people of Cañar (now Cuenca in Ecuador) used
to sacrifice a hundred children annually at harvest. The
kings of Quito, the Incas of Peru, and for a long time the
Spaniards were unable to suppress the bloody rite.<note place='foot'>Juan de Velasco, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire du
Royaume de Quito</hi>, i. (Paris, 1840) pp.
121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Ternaux-Compans, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages,
Relations et Mémoires Originaux pour
servir à l'Histoire de la Découverte de
l'Amérique</hi>, vol. xviii.).</note> At a
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
Mexican harvest-festival, when the first-fruits of the season
were offered to the sun, a criminal was placed between two
immense stones, balanced opposite each other, and was
crushed by them as they fell together. His remains were
buried, and a feast and dance followed. This sacrifice was
known as <q>the meeting of the stones.</q><note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et
de l'Amérique Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
i. 274; H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Races of the Pacific States</hi> (London,
1875-1876), ii. 340.</note> <q>Tlaloc was
worshipped in Mexico as the god of the thunder and the
storm which precedes the fertilising rain; elsewhere his wife
Xochiquetzal, who at Tlaxcallan was called Matlalcuéyé or
the Lady of the Blue Petticoats, shared these honours, and
it was to her that many countries in Central America
particularly paid their devotions. Every year, at the time
when the cobs of the still green and milky maize are about
to coagulate and ripen, they used to sacrifice to the goddess
four young girls, chosen among the noblest families of the
country; they were decked out in festal attire, crowned with
flowers, and conveyed in rich palanquins to the brink of the
hallowed waters, where the sacrifice was to be offered.
The priests, clad in long floating robes, their heads encircled
with feather crowns, marched in front of the litters carrying
censers with burning incense. The town of Elopango,
celebrated for its temple, was near the lake of the same
name, the etymology of which refers to the sheaves of tender
maize (<foreign rend='italic'>elotl</foreign>, <q>sheaf of tender maize</q>). It was dedicated to
the goddess Xochiquetzal, to whom the young victims were
offered by being hurled from the top of a rock into the
abyss. At the moment of consummating this inhuman rite,
the priests addressed themselves in turn to the four virgins
in order to banish the fear of death from their minds. They
drew for them a bright picture of the delights they were
about to enjoy in the company of the gods, and advised
them not to forget the earth which they had left behind, but
to entreat the divinity, to whom they despatched them, to
bless the forthcoming harvest.</q><note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <q>Aperçus
d'un voyage dans les États de San-Salvador
et de Guatemala,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris),
IVème Série, xiii. (1857) pp. 278
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We have seen that the
ancient Mexicans also sacrificed human beings at all the
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
various stages in the growth of the maize, the age of the
victims corresponding to the age of the corn; for they
sacrificed new-born babes at sowing, older children when
the grain had sprouted, and so on till it was fully ripe,
when they sacrificed old men.<note place='foot'>Herrera, quoted by A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Culturländer des alten Amerika</hi> (Berlin,
1878), ii. 379 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis,
Osiris</hi>, Second Edition, pp. 338 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> No doubt the correspondence
between the ages of the victims and the state
of the corn was supposed to enhance the efficacy of the
sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops
among the
Pawnees.</note>
The Pawnees annually sacrificed a human victim in
spring when they sowed their fields. The sacrifice was
believed to have been enjoined on them by the Morning
Star, or by a certain bird which the Morning Star had sent
to them as its messenger. The bird was stuffed and preserved
as a powerful talisman. They thought that an
omission of this sacrifice would be followed by the total
failure of the crops of maize, beans, and pumpkins. The
victim was a captive of either sex. He was clad in the
gayest and most costly attire, was fattened on the choicest
food, and carefully kept in ignorance of his doom. When
he was fat enough, they bound him to a cross in the presence
of the multitude, danced a solemn dance, then cleft his head
with a tomahawk and shot him with arrows. According to
one trader, the squaws then cut pieces of flesh from the
victim's body, with which they greased their hoes; but this
was denied by another trader who had been present at the
ceremony. Immediately after the sacrifice the people proceeded
to plant their fields. A particular account has been
preserved of the sacrifice of a Sioux girl by the Pawnees in
April 1837 or 1838. The girl was fourteen or fifteen years
old and had been kept for six months and well treated.
Two days before the sacrifice she was led from wigwam to
wigwam, accompanied by the whole council of chiefs and
warriors. At each lodge she received a small billet of wood
and a little paint, which she handed to the warrior next to
her. In this way she called at every wigwam, receiving at
each the same present of wood and paint. On the twenty-second
of April she was taken out to be sacrificed, attended
by the warriors, each of whom carried two pieces of wood
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
which he had received from her hands. Her body having
been painted half red and half black, she was attached to a
sort of gibbet and roasted for some time over a slow fire, then
shot to death with arrows. The chief sacrificer next tore
out her heart and devoured it. While her flesh was still
warm it was cut in small pieces from the bones, put in little
baskets, and taken to a neighbouring corn-field. There the
head chief took a piece of the flesh from a basket and
squeezed a drop of blood upon the newly-deposited grains of
corn. His example was followed by the rest, till all the seed
had been sprinkled with the blood; it was then covered up
with earth. According to one account the body of the victim
was reduced to a kind of paste, which was rubbed or sprinkled
not only on the maize but also on the potatoes, the beans,
and other seeds to fertilise them. By this sacrifice they
hoped to obtain plentiful crops.<note place='foot'>E. James, <hi rend='italic'>Account of an Expedition
from Pittsburgh to the Rocky Mountains</hi>
(London, 1823), ii. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. R.
Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes of the United
States</hi> (Philadelphia, 1853-1856), v.
77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. De Smet, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la
Propagation de la Foi</hi>, xi. (1838) pp.
493 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation
de la Foi</hi>, xv. (1843) pp. 277-279;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages aux Montagnes Rocheuses</hi>,
Nouvelle Edition (Paris and Brussels,
1873), pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The accounts by
Schoolcraft and De Smet of the sacrifice
of the Sioux girl are independent and
supplement each other. According to
De Smet, who wrote from the descriptions
of four eye-witnesses, the procession
from hut to hut for the purpose
of collecting wood took place on the
morning of the sacrifice. Another
description of the sacrifice is given by
Mr. G. B. Grinnell from the recollection
of an eye-witness (<hi rend='italic'>Pawnee Hero Stories
and Folk-tales</hi>, New York, 1889, pp.
362-369). According to this last
account the victim was shot with arrows
and afterwards burnt. Before the body
was consumed in the fire a man pulled
out the arrows, cut open the breast of
the victim, and having smeared his face
with the blood ran away as fast as he
could.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops in
Africa.</note>
A West African queen used to sacrifice a man and
woman in the month of March. They were killed with
spades and hoes, and their bodies buried in the middle of a
field which had just been tilled.<note place='foot'>J. B. Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique
de l'Ethiopie occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1732),
i. 380.</note> At Lagos in Guinea it
was the custom annually to impale a young girl alive soon
after the spring equinox in order to secure good crops.
Along with her were sacrificed sheep and goats, which, with
yams, heads of maize, and plantains, were hung on stakes on
each side of her. The victims were bred up for the purpose
in the king's seraglio, and their minds had been so powerfully
wrought upon by the fetish men that they went cheerfully to
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
their fate.<note place='foot'>John Adams, <hi rend='italic'>Sketches taken during
Ten Voyages in Africa between the years
1786 and 1800</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p.
25.</note> A similar sacrifice used to be annually offered
at Benin, in Guinea.<note place='foot'>P. Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves</hi>
(Paris, 1885), p. 132.</note> The Marimos, a Bechuana tribe,
sacrifice a human being for the crops. The victim chosen
is generally a short, stout man. He is seized by violence
or intoxicated and taken to the fields, where he is killed
amongst the wheat to serve as <q>seed</q> (so they phrase it).
After his blood has coagulated in the sun, it is burned along
with the frontal bone, the flesh attached to it, and the brain;
the ashes are then scattered over the ground to fertilise it.
The rest of the body is eaten.<note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage d'exploration au Nord-est de
la Colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi>
(Paris, 1842), pp. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
custom has probably long been obsolete.</note> The Wamegi of the Usagara
hills in German East Africa used to offer human sacrifices
of a peculiar kind once a year about the time of harvest,
which was also the time of sowing; for the Wamegi have
two crops annually, one in September and one in February.
The festival was usually held in September or October.
The victim was a girl who had attained the age of puberty.
She was taken to a hill where the festival was to be
celebrated, and there she was crushed to death between two
branches.<note place='foot'>From information given me by
my friend the Rev. John Roscoe, who
resided for some time among the
Wamegi and suppressed the sacrifice
in 1886.</note> The sacrifice was not performed in the fields,
and my informant could not ascertain its object, but we may
conjecture that it was to ensure good crops in the following
year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops in the
Philippines.</note>
The Bagobos of Mindanao, one of the Philippine Islands,
offer a human sacrifice before they sow their rice. The victim
is a slave, who is hewn to pieces in the forest.<note place='foot'>F. Blumentritt, <q>Das Stromgebiet
des Rio Grande de Mindanao,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Petermanns
Mitteilungen</hi>, xxxvii. (1891)
p. 110.</note> The
natives of Bontoc, a province in the interior of Luzon,
one of the Philippine Islands, are passionate head-hunters.
Their principal seasons for head-hunting are the times
of planting and reaping the rice. In order that the
crop may turn out well, every farm must get at least one
human head at planting and one at sowing. The head-hunters
go out in twos or threes, lie in wait for the victim,
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
whether man or woman, cut off his or her head, hands, and
feet, and bring them back in haste to the village, where they
are received with great rejoicings. The skulls are at first
exposed on the branches of two or three dead trees which
stand in an open space of every village surrounded by large
stones which serve as seats. The people then dance round
them and feast and get drunk. When the flesh has decayed
from the head, the man who cut it off takes it home and
preserves it as a relic, while his companions do the same
with the hands and the feet.<note place='foot'>A. Schadenberg, <q>Beiträge zur
Kenntniss der im Innern Nordluzons
lebenden Stämme,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>,
1888, p. (39) (bound with <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xx. 1888).</note> Similar customs are observed
by the Apoyaos, another tribe in the interior of Luzon.<note place='foot'>Schadenberg, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</hi>,
1889, p. (681) (bound with <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xxi. 1889).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops
among the
Wild Wa
of Burma.</note>
The Wild Wa, an agricultural tribe on the north-eastern
frontier of Upper Burma, still hunt for human
heads as a means of promoting the welfare of the crops.
The Wa regards his skulls as a protection against the
powers of evil. <q>Without a skull his crops would fail;
without a skull his kine might die; without a skull the
father and mother spirits would be shamed and might be
enraged; if there were no protecting skull the other spirits
who are all malignant, might gain entrance and kill the
inhabitants, or drink all the liquor.</q> The Wa country is
a series of mountain ranges shelving rapidly down to narrow
valleys from two to five thousand feet deep. The villages
are all perched high on the slopes, some just under the
crest of the ridge, some lower down on a small projecting
spur of flat ground. Industrious cultivation has cleared
away the jungle, and the villages stand out conspicuously
in the landscape as yellowish-brown blotches on the hillsides.
Each village is fortified by an earthen rampart so
thickly overgrown with cactuses and other shrubs as to be
impenetrable. The only entrance is through a narrow, low
and winding tunnel, the floor of which, for additional
security, is thickly studded with pegs to wound the feet of
enemies who might attempt to force a way in. The Wa
depend for their subsistence mainly on their crops of
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
buckwheat, beans, and maize; rice they cultivate only to
distil a strong spirituous liquor from it. They had need be
industrious, for no field can be reached without a climb up
or down the steep mountain-side. Sometimes the rice-fields
lie three thousand feet or more below the village, and they
require constant attention. But the chief crop raised by
the Wa is the poppy, from which they make opium. In
February and March the hill-tops for miles are white
with the blossom, and you may travel for days through
nothing but fields of poppies. Then, too, is the proper
season for head-hunting. It opens in March and lasts
through April. Parties of head-hunters at that time go
forth to prowl for human prey. As a rule they will not
behead people of a neighbouring village nor even of any
village on the same range of hills. To find victims they go
to the next range or at any rate to a distance, and the
farther the better, for the heads of strangers are preferred.
The reason is that the ghosts of strangers, being unfamiliar
with the country, are much less likely to stray away from
their skulls; hence they make more vigilant sentinels than
the ghosts of people better acquainted with the neighbourhood,
who are apt to go off duty without waiting for the
tedious formality of relieving guard. When head-hunters
return to a village with human heads, the rejoicing is
uproarious. Then the great drum is beaten frantically,
and its deep hollow boom resounding far and wide through
the hills announces to the neighbourhood the glad tidings of
murder successfully perpetrated. Then the barrels, or rather
the bamboos, of rice-spirit are tapped, and while the genial
stream flows and the women and children dance and sing
for glee, the men drink themselves blind and mad drunk.
The ghastly head, which forms the centre of all this
rejoicing, is first taken to the spirit-house, a small shed
which usually stands on the highest point of the village
site. There, wrapt in grass or leaves, it is hung up in
a basket to ripen and bleach. When all the flesh and
sinews have mouldered away and nothing remains but the
blanched and grinning skull, it is put to rest in the village
Golgotha. This is an avenue of huge old trees, whose interlacing
boughs form a verdant archway overhead and, with the
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
dense undergrowth, cast a deep shadow on the ground below.
Every village has such an avenue stretching along the hillside
sometimes for a long distance, or even till it meets the
avenue of the neighbouring village. In the solemn gloom
of this verdurous canopy is the Place of Skulls. On one side
of the avenue stands a row of wooden posts, usually mere
trunks of trees with the bark peeled off, but sometimes
rudely carved and painted with designs in red and black.
A little below the top of each post is cut a niche, and in
front of the niche is a ledge. On this ledge the skull
is deposited, sometimes so that it is in full view of
passers-by in the avenue, sometimes so that it only grins
at them through a slit. Most villages count their skulls by
tens or twenties, but some of them have hundreds of these
trophies, especially when the avenue forms an unbroken
continuity of shade between the villages. The old skulls
ensure peace to the village, but at least one new one should
be taken every year, that the rice may grow green far down
in the depths of the valley, that the maize may tinge with
its golden hue the steep mountain-sides, and that the hilltops
may be white for miles and miles with the bloom of
the poppy.<note place='foot'>(Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P.
Hardiman, <hi rend='italic'>Gazetteer of Upper
Burma and the Shan States</hi> (Rangoon,
1900-1901), Part i. vol. i. pp. 493-509.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops
among the
Shans of
Indo-China
and the
Nagas and
other tribes
of India.</note>
The Shans of Indo-China still believe in the efficacy of
human sacrifice to procure a good harvest, though they act
on the belief less than some other tribes of this region.
Their practice now is to poison somebody at the state
festival, which is generally held at some time between March
and May.<note place='foot'>Col. R. G. Woodthorpe, <q>Some
Account of the Shans and Hill Tribes
of the States on the Mekong,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxvi.
(1897) p. 24.</note> Among the Lhota Naga, one of the many
savage tribes who inhabit the deep rugged labyrinthine glens
which wind into the mountains from the rich valley of
Brahmapootra,<note place='foot'>For a general description of the
country and the tribes see L. A.
Waddell, <q>The Tribes of the Brahmaputra
Valley,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, lxix. Part iii.
(Calcutta, 1901), pp. 1-127.</note> it used to be a common custom to chop
off the heads, hands, and feet of people they met with,
and then to stick up the severed extremities in their
fields to ensure a good crop of grain. They bore no
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
ill-will whatever to the persons upon whom they operated
in this unceremonious fashion. Once they flayed a
boy alive, carved him in pieces, and distributed the flesh
among all the villagers, who put it into their corn-bins to
avert bad luck and ensure plentiful crops of grain. The
Angami, another tribe of the same region, used also to relieve
casual passers-by of their heads, hands, and feet, with the
same excellent intention.<note place='foot'>Miss G. M. Godden, <q>Naga and
other Frontier Tribes of North-Eastern
India,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxvii. (1898) pp. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The hill tribe Kudulu, near
Vizagapatam in the Madras Presidency, offered human
sacrifices to the god Jankari for the purpose of obtaining
good crops. The ceremony was generally performed on the
Sunday before or after the Pongal feast. For the most part
the victim was purchased, and until the time for the sacrifice
came he was free to wander about the village, to eat and
drink what he liked, and even to lie with any woman he
met. On the appointed day he was carried before the
idol drunk; and when one of the villagers had cut a hole
in his stomach and smeared the blood on the idol, the
crowds from the neighbouring villages rushed upon him
and hacked him to pieces. All who were fortunate enough
to secure morsels of his flesh carried them away and presented
them to their village idols.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes and Queries</hi>,
i. p. 4, § 15 (April 1891).</note> The Gonds of India, a
Dravidian race, kidnapped Brahman boys, and kept them as
victims to be sacrificed on various occasions. At sowing and
reaping, after a triumphal procession, one of the lads was
slain by being punctured with a poisoned arrow. His blood
was then sprinkled over the ploughed field or the ripe crop,
and his flesh was devoured.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. pp.
127 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 721 (May 1885).</note> The Oraons or Uraons of
Chota Nagpur worship a goddess called Anna Kuari, who
can give good crops and make a man rich, but to induce her
to do so it is necessary to offer human sacrifices. In spite
of the vigilance of the British Government these sacrifices are
said to be still secretly perpetrated. The victims are poor
waifs and strays whose disappearance attracts no notice.
April and May are the months when the catchpoles are out
on the prowl. At that time strangers will not go about the
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
country alone, and parents will not let their children enter
the jungle or herd the cattle. When a catchpole has found
a victim, he cuts his throat and carries away the upper
part of the ring finger and the nose. The goddess takes up
her abode in the house of any man who has offered her a
sacrifice, and from that time his fields yield a double harvest.
The form she assumes in the house is that of a small child.
When the householder brings in his unhusked rice, he takes
the goddess and rolls her over the heap to double its size.
But she soon grows restless and can only be pacified with
the blood of fresh human victims.<note place='foot'>Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., <q>Religion
and Customs of the Uraons,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, vol. i.
No. 9 (Calcutta, 1906), pp. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
sacrifices
for the
crops
among the
Khonds.</note>
But the best known case of human sacrifices, systematically
offered to ensure good crops, is supplied by the
Khonds or Kandhs, another Dravidian race in Bengal. Our
knowledge of them is derived from the accounts written by
British officers who, about the middle of the nineteenth
century, were engaged in putting them down.<note place='foot'>Major S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>Memorials
of Service in India</hi> (London,
1865), pp. 113-131; Major-General
John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Tribes of Khondistan</hi>
(London, 1864), pp. 52-58, etc.
Compare Mgr. Neyret, Bishop of Vizagapatam,
in <hi rend='italic'>Annales de la Propagation
de la Foi</hi>, xxiii. (1851) pp. 402-404;
E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes on
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1906), pp.
510-519; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes of
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), iii.
371-385.</note> The sacrifices
were offered to the Earth Goddess, Tari Pennu or Bera
Pennu, and were believed to ensure good crops and immunity
from all disease and accidents. In particular, they were
considered necessary in the cultivation of turmeric, the
Khonds arguing that the turmeric could not have a deep red
colour without the shedding of blood.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 56.</note> The victim or Meriah,
as he was called, was acceptable to the goddess only if he
had been purchased, or had been born a victim&mdash;that is, the
son of a victim father, or had been devoted as a child
by his father or guardian. Khonds in distress often
sold their children for victims, <q>considering the beatification
of their souls certain, and their death, for the benefit of
mankind, the most honourable possible.</q> A man of the
Panua tribe was once seen to load a Khond with curses,
and finally to spit in his face, because the Khond had sold
for a victim his own child, whom the Panua had wished to
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
marry. A party of Khonds, who saw this, immediately
pressed forward to comfort the seller of his child, saying,
<q>Your child has died that all the world may live, and the
Earth Goddess herself will wipe that spittle from your face.</q><note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The victims were often kept for years before they were
sacrificed. Being regarded as consecrated beings, they were
treated with extreme affection, mingled with deference, and
were welcomed wherever they went. A Meriah youth, on
attaining maturity, was generally given a wife, who was herself
usually a Meriah or victim; and with her he received
a portion of land and farm-stock. Their offspring were
also victims. Human sacrifices were offered to the Earth
Goddess by tribes, branches of tribes, or villages, both at
periodical festivals and on extraordinary occasions. The
periodical sacrifices were generally so arranged by tribes and
divisions of tribes that each head of a family was enabled, at
least once a year, to procure a shred of flesh for his fields,
generally about the time when his chief crop was laid
down.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 112.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
preliminary
to the
sacrifice.</note>
The mode of performing these tribal sacrifices was as
follows. Ten or twelve days before the sacrifice, the victim
was devoted by cutting off his hair, which, until then, had
been kept unshorn. Crowds of men and women assembled
to witness the sacrifice; none might be excluded, since the
sacrifice was declared to be for all mankind. It was preceded
by several days of wild revelry and gross debauchery.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
On the day before the sacrifice the victim, dressed in a new
garment, was led forth from the village in solemn procession,
with music and dancing, to the Meriah grove, a clump of
high forest trees standing a little way from the village and
untouched by the axe. There they tied him to a post, which
was sometimes placed between two plants of the sankissar
shrub. He was then anointed with oil, ghee, and turmeric,
and adorned with flowers; and <q>a species of reverence,
which it is not easy to distinguish from adoration,</q> was paid
to him throughout the day. A great struggle now arose to
obtain the smallest relic from his person; a particle of the
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
turmeric paste with which he was smeared, or a drop of his
spittle, was esteemed of sovereign virtue, especially by the
women.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 118.</note> The crowd danced round the post to music, and,
addressing the earth, said, <q>O God, we offer this sacrifice to
you; give us good crops, seasons, and health</q>; then speaking
to the victim they said, <q>We bought you with a price,
and did not seize you; now we sacrifice you according to
custom, and no sin rests with us.</q><note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Consummation
of the
sacrifice.</note>
On the last morning the orgies, which had been scarcely
interrupted during the night, were resumed, and continued
till noon, when they ceased, and the assembly proceeded to
consummate the sacrifice. The victim was again anointed
with oil, and each person touched the anointed part, and
wiped the oil on his own head. In some places they took
the victim in procession round the village, from door to door,
where some plucked hair from his head, and others begged
for a drop of his spittle, with which they anointed their
heads.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 55, 112.</note> As the victim might not be bound nor make any
show of resistance, the bones of his arms and, if necessary,
his legs were broken; but often this precaution was rendered
unnecessary by stupefying him with opium.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
119; J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 113.</note> The mode of
putting him to death varied in different places. One of the
commonest modes seems to have been strangulation, or
squeezing to death. The branch of a green tree was cleft
several feet down the middle; the victim's neck (in other
places, his chest) was inserted in the cleft, which the priest,
aided by his assistants, strove with all his force to close.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 127.
Instead of the branch of a green tree,
Campbell mentions two strong planks
or bamboos (p. 57) or a slit bamboo
(p. 182).</note>
Then he wounded the victim slightly with his axe, whereupon
the crowd rushed at the wretch and hewed the flesh from the
bones, leaving the head and bowels untouched. Sometimes
he was cut up alive.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 56, 58,
120.</note> In Chinna Kimedy he was dragged
along the fields, surrounded by the crowd, who, avoiding his
head and intestines, hacked the flesh from his body with
their knives till he died.<note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi> (Calcutta, 1872), p. 288,
quoting Colonel Campbell's <hi rend='italic'>Report</hi>.</note> Another very common mode of
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
sacrifice in the same district was to fasten the victim to the
proboscis of a wooden elephant, which revolved on a stout
post, and, as it whirled round, the crowd cut the flesh from
the victim while life remained. In some villages Major
Campbell found as many as fourteen of these wooden
elephants, which had been used at sacrifices.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 126. The
elephant represented the Earth Goddess
herself, who was here conceived
in elephant-form (Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
51, 126). In the hill tracts of Goomsur
she was represented in peacock-form,
and the post to which the victim was
bound bore the effigy of a peacock
(Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 54).</note> In one district
the victim was put to death slowly by fire. A low
stage was formed, sloping on either side like a roof; upon it
they laid the victim, his limbs wound round with cords to
confine his struggles. Fires were then lighted and hot
brands applied, to make him roll up and down the slopes of
the stage as long as possible; for the more tears he shed the
more abundant would be the supply of rain. Next day the
body was cut to pieces.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 130.
In Mexico also the tears of the human
victims were sometimes regarded as an
omen of rain (B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
générale des Choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi>,
traduite par D. Jourdanet et R.
Simeon, Paris, 1880, bk. ii. ch. 20,
p. 86).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Flesh of
the victim
used to
fertilise the
fields.</note>
The flesh cut from the victim was instantly taken home
by the persons who had been deputed by each village to
bring it. To secure its rapid arrival, it was sometimes
forwarded by relays of men, and conveyed with postal fleetness
fifty or sixty miles.<note place='foot'>E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi>, p. 288, referring to Colonel
Campbell's <hi rend='italic'>Report</hi>.</note> In each village all who stayed at
home fasted rigidly until the flesh arrived. The bearer
deposited it in the place of public assembly, where it was
received by the priest and the heads of families. The priest
divided it into two portions, one of which he offered to the
Earth Goddess by burying it in a hole in the ground with
his back turned, and without looking. Then each man
added a little earth to bury it, and the priest poured water
on the spot from a hill gourd. The other portion of flesh
he divided into as many shares as there were heads of
houses present. Each head of a house rolled his shred of
flesh in leaves, and buried it in his favourite field, placing it
in the earth behind his back without looking.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 129.
Compare J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 55,
58, 113, 121, 187.</note> In some
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
places each man carried his portion of flesh to the stream
which watered his fields, and there hung it on a pole.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 182.</note> For
three days thereafter no house was swept; and, in one
district, strict silence was observed, no fire might be given
out, no wood cut, and no strangers received. The remains
of the human victim (namely, the head, bowels, and bones)
were watched by strong parties the night after the sacrifice;
and next morning they were burned, along with a whole
sheep, on a funeral pile. The ashes were scattered over
the fields, laid as paste over the houses and granaries, or
mixed with the new corn to preserve it from insects.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
128; E. T. Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology
of Bengal</hi>, p. 288.</note>
Sometimes, however, the head and bones were buried, not
burnt.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 55, 182.</note> After the suppression of the human sacrifices, inferior
victims were substituted in some places; for instance,
in the capital of Chinna Kimedy a goat took the place of
a human victim.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 187.</note> Others sacrifice a buffalo. They tie it
to a wooden post in a sacred grove, dance wildly round it
with brandished knives, then, falling on the living animal,
hack it to shreds and tatters in a few minutes, fighting and
struggling with each other for every particle of flesh. As
soon as a man has secured a piece he makes off with it at
full speed to bury it in his fields, according to ancient
custom, before the sun has set, and as some of them have far
to go they must run very fast. All the women throw clods
of earth at the rapidly retreating figures of the men, some of
them taking very good aim. Soon the sacred grove, so
lately a scene of tumult, is silent and deserted except for a
few people who remain to guard all that is left of the buffalo,
to wit, the head, the bones, and the stomach, which are
burned with ceremony at the foot of the stake.<note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes of
Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), iii.
381-385.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In these
Khond
sacrifices
the human
victims
appear to
have been
regarded as
divine.</note>
In these Khond sacrifices the Meriahs are represented
by our authorities as victims offered to propitiate the Earth
Goddess. But from the treatment of the victims both
before and after death it appears that the custom cannot
be explained as merely a propitiatory sacrifice. A part of
the flesh certainly was offered to the Earth Goddess, but the
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
rest was buried by each householder in his fields, and the
ashes of the other parts of the body were scattered over the
fields, laid as paste on the granaries, or mixed with the new
corn. These latter customs imply that to the body of the
Meriah there was ascribed a direct or intrinsic power of
making the crops to grow, quite independent of the indirect
efficacy which it might have as an offering to secure the
good-will of the deity. In other words, the flesh and ashes
of the victim were believed to be endowed with a magical or
physical power of fertilising the land. The same intrinsic
power was ascribed to the blood and tears of the Meriah,
his blood causing the redness of the turmeric and his tears
producing rain; for it can hardly be doubted that, originally
at least, the tears were supposed to bring down the rain, not
merely to prognosticate it. Similarly the custom of pouring
water on the buried flesh of the Meriah was no doubt a rain-charm.
Again, magical power as an attribute of the Meriah
appears in the sovereign virtue believed to reside in anything
that came from his person, as his hair or spittle. The
ascription of such power to the Meriah indicates that he was
much more than a mere man sacrificed to propitiate a deity.
Once more, the extreme reverence paid him points to the
same conclusion. Major Campbell speaks of the Meriah as
<q>being regarded as something more than mortal,</q><note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 112.</note> and
Major Macpherson says, <q>A species of reverence, which it is
not easy to distinguish from adoration, is paid to him.</q><note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 118.</note> In
short, the Meriah seems to have been regarded as divine.
As such, he may originally have represented the Earth
Goddess or, perhaps, a deity of vegetation; though in later
times he came to be regarded rather as a victim offered to a
deity than as himself an incarnate god. This later view of
the Meriah as a victim rather than a divinity may perhaps
have received undue emphasis from the European writers
who have described the Khond religion. Habituated to the
later idea of sacrifice as an offering made to a god for the
purpose of conciliating his favour, European observers are
apt to interpret all religious slaughter in this sense, and to
suppose that wherever such slaughter takes place, there must
necessarily be a deity to whom the carnage is believed by
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
the slayers to be acceptable. Thus their preconceived ideas
may unconsciously colour and warp their descriptions of
savage rites.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Traces of
an identification
of
the human
victim with
the god in
other
sacrifices.</note>
The same custom of killing the representative of a god,
of which strong traces appear in the Khond sacrifices, may
perhaps be detected in some of the other human sacrifices
described above. Thus the ashes of the slaughtered Marimo
were scattered over the fields; the blood of the Brahman
lad was put on the crop and field; the flesh of the slain
Naga was stowed in the corn-bin; and the blood of the
Sioux girl was allowed to trickle on the seed.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</note> Again, the
identification of the victim with the corn, in other words,
the view that he is an embodiment or spirit of the corn, is
brought out in the pains which seem to be taken to secure
a physical correspondence between him and the natural
object which he embodies or represents. Thus the Mexicans
killed young victims for the young corn and old ones for the
ripe corn; the Marimos sacrifice, as <q>seed,</q> a short, fat man,
the shortness of his stature corresponding to that of the
young corn, his fatness to the condition which it is desired
that the crops may attain; and the Pawnees fattened their
victims probably with the same view. Again, the identification
of the victim with the corn comes out in the African
custom of killing him with spades and hoes, and the Mexican
custom of grinding him, like corn, between two stones.
</p>

<p>
One more point in these savage customs deserves to be
noted. The Pawnee chief devoured the heart of the Sioux
girl, and the Marimos and Gonds ate the victim's flesh. If,
as we suppose, the victim was regarded as divine, it follows
that in eating his flesh his worshippers believed themselves
to be partaking of the body of their god.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. The Corn-spirit slain in his Human Representatives.'/>
<head>§ 4. The Corn-spirit slain in his Human Representatives.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Analogy
of these
barbarous
rites to the
harvest
customs of
Europe.</note>
The barbarous rites just described offer analogies to the
harvest customs of Europe. Thus the fertilising virtue
ascribed to the corn-spirit is shewn equally in the savage
custom of mixing the victim's blood or ashes with the seed-corn
and the European custom of mixing the grain from
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
the last sheaf with the young corn in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</note> Again, the
identification of the person with the corn appears alike in
the savage custom of adapting the age and stature of the
victim to the age and stature, whether actual or expected, of
the crop; in the Scotch and Styrian rules that when the corn-spirit
is conceived as the Maiden the last corn shall be cut
by a young maiden, but when it is conceived as the Corn-mother
it shall be cut by an old woman;<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> in the Lothringian
warning given to old women to save themselves when the
Old Woman is being killed, that is, when the last corn
is being threshed;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</note> and in the Tyrolese expectation that
if the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is tall,
the next year's corn will be tall also.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</note> Further, the same
identification is implied in the savage custom of killing the
representative of the corn-spirit with hoes or spades or by
grinding him between stones, and in the European custom of
pretending to kill him with the scythe or the flail. Once
more the Khond custom of pouring water on the buried flesh
of the victim is parallel to the European customs of pouring
water on the personal representative of the corn-spirit or
plunging him into a stream.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, with the references
in note 1; <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 195-197.</note> Both the Khond and the
European customs are rain-charms.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Human
representative
of the
corn-spirit
slain on the
harvest-field.</note>
To return now to the Lityerses story. It has been
shewn that in rude society human beings have been commonly
killed to promote the growth of the crops. There is
therefore no improbability in the supposition that they may
once have been killed for a like purpose in Phrygia and
Europe; and when Phrygian legend and European folk-custom,
closely agreeing with each other, point to the conclusion
that men were so slain, we are bound, provisionally
at least, to accept the conclusion. Further, both the Lityerses
story and European harvest-customs agree in indicating that
the victim was put to death as a representative of the corn-spirit,
and this indication is in harmony with the view which
some savages appear to take of the victim slain to make the
crops flourish. On the whole, then, we may fairly suppose
that both in Phrygia and in Europe the representative of
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
the corn-spirit was annually killed upon the harvest-field.
Grounds have been already shewn for believing that similarly
in Europe the representative of the tree-spirit was annually
slain. The proofs of these two remarkable and closely
analogous customs are entirely independent of each other.
Their coincidence seems to furnish fresh presumption in
favour of both.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The victim
who represented
the
corn-spirit
may have
been a
passing
stranger or
the reaper,
binder, or
thresher
of the
last corn.</note>
To the question, How was the representative of the corn-spirit
chosen? one answer has been already given. Both
the Lityerses story and European folk-custom shew that
passing strangers were regarded as manifestations of the
corn-spirit escaping from the cut or threshed corn, and as
such were seized and slain. But this is not the only answer
which the evidence suggests. According to the Phrygian
legend the victims of Lityerses were not simply passing
strangers, but persons whom he had vanquished in a reaping
contest and afterwards wrapt up in corn-sheaves and
beheaded.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</note> This suggests that the representative of the
corn-spirit may have been selected by means of a competition
on the harvest-field, in which the vanquished
competitor was compelled to accept the fatal honour.
The supposition is countenanced by European harvest-customs.
We have seen that in Europe there is sometimes
a contest amongst the reapers to avoid being last, and that
the person who is vanquished in this competition, that is,
who cuts the last corn, is often roughly handled. It is true
we have not found that a pretence is made of killing him;
but on the other hand we have found that a pretence is
made of killing the man who gives the last stroke at threshing,
that is, who is vanquished in the threshing contest.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</note>
Now, since it is in the character of representative of the
corn-spirit that the thresher of the last corn is slain in
mimicry, and since the same representative character attaches
(as we have seen) to the cutter and binder as well as to the
thresher of the last corn, and since the same repugnance is
evinced by harvesters to be last in any one of these labours,
we may conjecture that a pretence has been commonly made
of killing the reaper and binder as well as the thresher of the
last corn, and that in ancient times this killing was actually
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
carried out. This conjecture is corroborated by the common
superstition that whoever cuts the last corn must die soon.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 5.</note>
Sometimes it is thought that the person who binds the last
sheaf on the field will die in the course of next year.<note place='foot'>H. Pfannenschmid, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische
Erntefeste</hi> (Hanover, 1878), p. 98.</note> The
reason for fixing on the reaper, binder, or thresher of the
last corn as the representative of the corn-spirit may be this.
The corn-spirit is supposed to lurk as long as he can in the
corn, retreating before the reapers, the binders, and the
threshers at their work. But when he is forcibly expelled
from his refuge in the last corn cut or the last sheaf bound
or the last grain threshed, he necessarily assumes some other
form than that of the corn-stalks which had hitherto been his
garment or body. And what form can the expelled corn-spirit
assume more naturally than that of the person who
stands nearest to the corn from which he (the corn-spirit)
has just been expelled? But the person in question is
necessarily the reaper, binder, or thresher of the last corn.
He or she, therefore, is seized and treated as the corn-spirit
himself.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Perhaps
the victim
annually
sacrificed
in the
character
of the
corn-spirit
may have
been the
king
himself.</note>
Thus the person who was killed on the harvest-field as
the representative of the corn-spirit may have been either
a passing stranger or the harvester who was last at reaping,
binding, or threshing. But there is a third possibility, to
which ancient legend and modern folk-custom alike point.
Lityerses not only put strangers to death; he was himself
slain, and apparently in the same way as he had slain others,
namely, by being wrapt in a corn-sheaf, beheaded, and cast
into the river; and it is implied that this happened to
Lityerses on his own land.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>. It is not expressly
said that he was wrapt in a
sheaf.</note> Similarly in modern harvest-customs
the pretence of killing appears to be carried out
quite as often on the person of the master (farmer or squire)
as on that of strangers.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now when we remember that
Lityerses was said to have been a son of the King of
Phrygia, and that in one account he is himself called a king,
and when we combine with this the tradition that he was
put to death, apparently as a representative of the corn-spirit,
we are led to conjecture that we have here another
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
trace of the custom of annually slaying one of those divine
or priestly kings who are known to have held ghostly sway
in many parts of Western Asia and particularly in Phrygia.
The custom appears, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> to have been so far
modified in places that the king's son was slain in the king's
stead. Of the custom thus modified the story of Lityerses
would be, in one version at least, a reminiscence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Relation of
Lityerses
to Attis:
both may
have been
originally
corn-spirits,
or
the one a
corn-spirit
and the
other a
tree-spirit. Human
representatives
both
of Lityerses
and Attis
annually
slain.</note>
Turning now to the relation of the Phrygian Lityerses
to the Phrygian Attis, it may be remembered that at Pessinus&mdash;the
seat of a priestly kingship&mdash;the high-priest appears
to have been annually slain in the character of Attis, a god
of vegetation, and that Attis was described by an ancient
authority as <q>a reaped ear of corn.</q><note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus Attis, as an
embodiment of the corn-spirit, annually slain in the person
of his representative, might be thought to be ultimately
identical with Lityerses, the latter being simply the rustic
prototype out of which the state religion of Attis was
developed. It may have been so; but, on the other hand,
the analogy of European folk-custom warns us that amongst
the same people two distinct deities of vegetation may have
their separate personal representatives, both of whom are
slain in the character of gods at different times of the year.
For in Europe, as we have seen, it appears that one man
was commonly slain in the character of the tree-spirit in
spring, and another in the character of the corn-spirit in
autumn. It may have been so in Phrygia also. Attis was
especially a tree-god, and his connexion with corn may have
been only such an extension of the power of a tree-spirit as
is indicated in customs like the Harvest-May.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, the
representative of Attis appears to have been slain in spring;
whereas Lityerses must have been slain in summer or
autumn, according to the time of the harvest in Phrygia.<note place='foot'>I do not know when the corn is
reaped in Phrygia; but the high upland
character of the country makes it likely
that harvest is later there than on the
coasts of the Mediterranean.</note>
On the whole, then, while we are not justified in regarding
Lityerses as the prototype of Attis, the two may be regarded
as parallel products of the same religious idea, and may have
stood to each other as in Europe the Old Man of harvest
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
stands to the Wild Man, the Leaf Man, and so forth, of
spring. Both were spirits or deities of vegetation, and the
personal representatives of both were annually slain. But
whereas the Attis worship became elevated into the dignity
of a State religion and spread to Italy, the rites of Lityerses
seem never to have passed the limits of their native Phrygia,
and always retained their character of rustic ceremonies performed
by peasants on the harvest-field. At most a few
villages may have clubbed together, as amongst the Khonds,
to procure a human victim to be slain as representative of the
corn-spirit for their common benefit. Such victims may have
been drawn from the families of priestly kings or kinglets,
which would account for the legendary character of Lityerses
as the son of a Phrygian king or as himself a king. When
villages did not so club together, each village or farm may
have procured its own representative of the corn-spirit by
dooming to death either a passing stranger or the harvester
who cut, bound, or threshed the last sheaf. Perhaps in the
olden time the practice of head-hunting as a means of promoting
the growth of the corn may have been as common
among the rude inhabitants of Europe and Western Asia as
it still is, or was till lately, among the primitive agricultural
tribes of Assam, Burma, the Philippine Islands, and the
Indian Archipelago.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
pp. 247-249. As to head-hunting in
British Borneo see H. L. Roth, <hi rend='italic'>The
Natives of Sarawak and British North
Borneo</hi> (London, 1896), ii. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; in
Central Celebes, see A. C. Kruijt,
<q>Het koppensnellen der Toradja's van
Midden-Celebes, en zijne Beteekenis,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke
Akademie van Wetenschappen</hi>,
Afdeelung Letterkunde, Vierde Reeks,
iii. part 2 (Amsterdam, 1899), pp. 147-229;
among the Igorot of Bontoc in
Luzon, see A. E. Jenks, <hi rend='italic'>The Bontoc
Igorot</hi> (Manilla, 1905), pp. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
among the Naga tribes of Assam, see
Miss G. M. Godden, <q>Naga and other
Frontier Tribes of North-East India</q>,
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxvii. (1898) pp. 12-17. It must not,
however, be thought that among these
tribes the custom of procuring human
heads is practised merely as a means
to ensure the growth of the crops; it is
apparently supposed to exert a salutary
influence on the whole life of the people
by providing them with guardian spirits
in the shape of the ghosts of the men
to whom in their lifetime the heads
belonged. The Scythians of Central
Europe in antiquity set great store on
the heads of the enemies whom they
had slain in war. See Herodotus,
iv. 64 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is hardly necessary to add that in
Phrygia, as in Europe, the old barbarous custom of killing
a man on the harvest-field or the threshing-floor had doubtless
passed into a mere pretence long before the classical era,
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
and was probably regarded by the reapers and threshers
themselves as no more than a rough jest which the license
of a harvest-home permitted them to play off on a passing
stranger, a comrade, or even on their master himself.<note place='foot'>There are traces in Greece itself of
an old custom of sacrificing human
victims to promote the fertility of the
earth. See Pausanias, vii. 19. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
compared with vii. 20. 1; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, viii.
53. 3; L. R. Farnell, <hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the
Greek States</hi>, ii. (Oxford, 1896) p. 455;
and <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similarity
of the
Bithynian
Bormus
to the
Phrygian
Attis.</note>
I have dwelt on the Lityerses song at length because it
affords so many points of comparison with European and
savage folk-custom. The other harvest songs of Western
Asia and Egypt, to which attention has been called above,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
may now be dismissed much more briefly. The similarity
of the Bithynian Bormus<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</note> to the Phrygian Lityerses helps to
bear out the interpretation which has been given of the
latter. Bormus, whose death or rather disappearance was
annually mourned by the reapers in a plaintive song, was,
like Lityerses, a king's son or at least the son of a wealthy
and distinguished man. The reapers whom he watched
were at work on his own fields, and he disappeared in going
to fetch water for them; according to one version of the
story he was carried off by the nymphs, doubtless the
nymphs of the spring or pool or river whither he went to
draw water.<note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Βῶρμον.</note> Viewed in the light of the Lityerses story
and of European folk-custom, this disappearance of Bormus
may be a reminiscence of the custom of binding the
farmer himself in a corn-sheaf and throwing him into the
water. The mournful strain which the reapers sang was
probably a lamentation over the death of the corn-spirit,
slain either in the cut corn or in the person of a human
representative; and the call which they addressed to him
may have been a prayer that he might return in fresh vigour
next year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Phoenician
Linus song
at the
vintage. Linus
identified
with
Adonis,
who may
have been
annually
represented
by a
human
victim.</note>
The Phoenician Linus song was sung at the vintage, at
least in the west of Asia Minor, as we learn from Homer;
and this, combined with the legend of Syleus, suggests that
in ancient times passing strangers were handled by vintagers
and vine-diggers in much the same way as they are said to
have been handled by the reaper Lityerses. The Lydian
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
Syleus, so ran the legend, compelled passers-by to dig for
him in his vineyard, till Hercules came and killed him and
dug up his vines by the roots.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, ii. 6. 3.</note> This seems to be the outline
of a legend like that of Lityerses; but neither ancient writers
nor modern folk-custom enable us to fill in the details.<note place='foot'>The scurrilities exchanged both in
ancient and modern times between
vine-dressers, vintagers, and passers-by
seem to belong to a different category.
See W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
But, further, the Linus song was probably sung also by
Phoenician reapers, for Herodotus compares it to the
Maneros song, which, as we have seen, was a lament raised
by Egyptian reapers over the cut corn. Further, Linus was
identified with Adonis, and Adonis has some claims to be
regarded as especially a corn-deity.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, pp. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus the Linus
lament, as sung at harvest, would be identical with the
Adonis lament; each would be the lamentation raised by
reapers over the dead spirit of the corn. But whereas Adonis,
like Attis, grew into a stately figure of mythology, adored
and mourned in splendid cities far beyond the limits of his
Phoenician home, Linus appears to have remained a simple
ditty sung by reapers and vintagers among the corn-sheaves
and the vines. The analogy of Lityerses and of folk-custom,
both European and savage, suggests that in Phoenicia the
slain corn-spirit&mdash;the dead Adonis&mdash;may formerly have
been represented by a human victim; and this suggestion
is possibly supported by the Harran legend that Tammuz
(Adonis) was slain by his cruel lord, who ground his bones
in a mill and scattered them to the wind. For in Mexico,
as we have seen, the human victim at harvest was crushed between
two stones; and both in Africa and India the ashes or
other remains of the victim were scattered over the fields.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>,
<ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But
the Harran legend may be only a mythical way of expressing
the grinding of corn in the mill and the scattering of the
seed. It seems worth suggesting that the mock king who was
annually killed at the Babylonian festival of the Sacaea on
the sixteenth day of the month Lous may have represented
Tammuz himself. For the historian Berosus, who records
the festival and its date, probably used the Macedonian
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
calendar, since he dedicated his history to Antiochus Soter;
and in his day the Macedonian month Lous appears to have
corresponded to the Babylonian month Tammuz.<note place='foot'>The probable correspondence of
the months, which supplies so welcome
a confirmation of the conjecture in the
text, was pointed out to me by my
friend W. Robertson Smith, who furnished
me with the following note:
<q>In the Syro-Macedonian calendar
Lous represents Ab, not Tammuz.
Was it different in Babylon? I think
it was, and one month different, at
least in the early times of the Greek
monarchy in Asia. For we know
from a Babylonian observation in the
Almagest (<hi rend='italic'>Ideler</hi>, i. 396) that in 229
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Xanthicus began on February 26.
It was therefore the month before the
equinoctial moon, not Nisan but Adar,
and consequently Lous answered to the
lunar month Tammuz.</q></note> If this
conjecture is right, the view that the mock king at the Sacaea
was slain in the character of a god would be established.
But to this point we shall return later on.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in
Egypt
(Osiris)
annually
represented
by a human
victim.</note>
There is a good deal more evidence that in Egypt the
slain corn-spirit&mdash;the dead Osiris&mdash;was represented by a
human victim, whom the reapers slew on the harvest-field,
mourning his death in a dirge, to which the Greeks, through
a verbal misunderstanding, gave the name of Maneros.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</note> For
the legend of Busiris seems to preserve a reminiscence of
human sacrifices once offered by the Egyptians in connexion
with the worship of Osiris. Busiris was said to have been
an Egyptian king who sacrificed all strangers on the altar
of Zeus. The origin of the custom was traced to a dearth
which afflicted the land of Egypt for nine years. A Cyprian
seer informed Busiris that the dearth would cease if a man
were annually sacrificed to Zeus. So Busiris instituted the
sacrifice. But when Hercules came to Egypt, and was being
dragged to the altar to be sacrificed, he burst his bonds
and slew Busiris and his son.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, ii. 5.
11; Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius,
<hi rend='italic'>Argon.</hi> iv. 1396; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Parall.</hi> 38.
Herodotus (ii. 45) discredits the idea
that the Egyptians ever offered human
sacrifices. But his authority is not to
be weighed against that of Manetho
(Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 73), who
affirms that they did. See further
Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi> (London
and New York, 1911), i. 210 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
who says (pp. 210, 212): <q>There is
abundant proof for the statement that
the Egyptians offered up sacrifices of
human beings, and that, in common
with many African tribes at the present
day, their customs in dealing with
vanquished enemies were bloodthirsty
and savage.... The passages from
Egyptian works quoted earlier in this
chapter prove that human sacrifices
were offered up at Heliopolis as well
as at Tetu, or Busiris, and the rumour
of such sacrifices has found expression
in the works of Greek writers.</q></note> Here then is a legend that
in Egypt a human victim was annually sacrificed to prevent
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
the failure of the crops, and a belief is implied that an
omission of the sacrifice would have entailed a recurrence of
that infertility which it was the object of the sacrifice to
prevent. So the Pawnees, as we have seen, believed that an
omission of the human sacrifice at planting would have been
followed by a total failure of their crops. The name Busiris
was in reality the name of a city, <foreign rend='italic'>pe-Asar</foreign>, <q>the house of
Osiris,</q><note place='foot'>E. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,
i. (Stuttgart, 1884), § 57,
p. 68.</note> the city being so called because it contained the
grave of Osiris. Indeed some high modern authorities
believe that Busiris was the original home of Osiris, from
which his worship spread to other parts of Egypt.<note place='foot'>E. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2 (Stuttgart and Berlin,
1909), p. 97; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique,
Les Origines</hi> (Paris, 1895), pp.
129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Both these eminent historians
have abandoned their former theory
that Osiris was the Sun-god. Professor
E. Meyer now speaks of Osiris as <q>the
great vegetation god</q> and, on the
same page, as <q>an earth-god</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
i. 2. p. 70). I am happy to find the
view of the nature of Osiris, which I
advocated many years ago, supported
by the authority of so distinguished an
Oriental scholar. Dr. E. A. Wallis
Budge holds that Busiris was the
oldest shrine of Osiris in the north of
Egypt, but that it was less ancient
than his shrine at Abydos in the south.
See E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi> (London
and New York, 1911), ii. 1.</note> The
human sacrifices were said to have been offered at his grave,
and the victims were red-haired men, whose ashes were
scattered abroad by means of winnowing-fans.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 88; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 73, compare 30, 33.</note> This tradition
of human sacrifices offered at the tomb of Osiris is
confirmed by the evidence of the monuments; for <q>we find
in the temple of Dendereh a human figure with a hare's
head and pierced with knives, tied to a stake before Osiris
Khenti-Amentiu, and Horus is shown in a Ptolemaic sculpture
at Karnak killing a bound hare-headed figure before the
bier of Osiris, who is represented in the form of Harpocrates.
That these figures are really human beings with the head of
an animal fastened on is proved by another sculpture at
Dendereh, where a kneeling man has the hawk's head and
wings over his head and shoulders, and in another place a
priest has the jackal's head on his shoulders, his own head
appearing through the disguise. Besides, Diodorus tells us
that the Egyptian kings in former times had worn on their
heads the fore-part of a lion, or of a bull, or of a dragon,
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
showing that this method of disguise or transformation was
a well-known custom.</q><note place='foot'>Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The Osireion
at Abydos</hi> (London, 1904), p. 30,
referring to Mariette, <hi rend='italic'>Dendereh</hi>, iv.
plates xxxi., lvi., and lxxxi. The passage
of Diodorus Siculus referred to is i.
62. 4. As to masks of animals worn
by Egyptian men and women in religious
rites see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 133; <hi rend='italic'>The
Dying God</hi>, p. 72.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assimilation
of
human
victims to
the corn
which they
represent.</note>
In the light of the foregoing discussion the Egyptian
tradition of Busiris admits of a consistent and fairly probable
explanation. Osiris, the corn-spirit, was annually
represented at harvest by a stranger, whose red hair made
him a suitable representative of the ripe corn. This man,
in his representative character, was slain on the harvest-field,
and mourned by the reapers, who prayed at the same time
that the corn-spirit might revive and return (<foreign rend='italic'>mââ-ne-rha</foreign>,
Maneros) with renewed vigour in the following year. Finally,
the victim, or some part of him, was burned, and the ashes
scattered by winnowing-fans over the fields to fertilise them.
Here the choice of the victim on the ground of his resemblance
to the corn which he was to represent agrees with
the Mexican and African customs already described.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</note>
Similarly the woman who died in the character of the Corn-mother
at the Mexican midsummer sacrifice had her face
painted red and yellow in token of the colours of the corn,
and she wore a pasteboard mitre surmounted by waving
plumes in imitation of the tassel of the maize.<note place='foot'>E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the New
World called America</hi>, i. (Oxford,
1892) p. 422.</note> On the
other hand, at the festival of the Goddess of the White
Maize the Mexicans sacrificed lepers.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique et
de l'Amérique Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
iii. 535.</note> The Romans sacrificed
red-haired puppies in spring to avert the supposed
blighting influence of the Dog-star, believing that the crops
would thus grow ripe and ruddy.<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Catularia</hi>, p. 45 ed.
C. O. Müller. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Rutilae canes</hi>, p. 285; Columella, <hi rend='italic'>De
re rustica</hi>, x. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv.
905 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii.
14.</note> The heathen of Harran
offered to the sun, moon, and planets human victims who
were chosen on the ground of their supposed resemblance
to the heavenly bodies to which they were sacrificed; for
example, the priests, clothed in red and smeared with blood,
offered a red-haired, red-cheeked man to <q>the red planet
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
Mars</q> in a temple which was painted red and draped with
red hangings.<note place='foot'>D. Chwolsohn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier und
der Ssabismus</hi> (St. Petersburg, 1856),
ii. 388 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, pp. 384
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 386 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 391, 393, 395, 397.
For other instances of the assimilation
of the victim to the god, see H. Oldenberg,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Religion des Veda</hi> (Berlin,
1894), pp. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 357-359.</note> These and the like cases of assimilating the
victim to the god, or to the natural phenomenon which he
represents, are based ultimately on the principle of homoeopathic
or imitative magic, the notion being that the object
aimed at will be most readily attained by means of a sacrifice
which resembles the effect that it is designed to bring about.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Remains of
victims
scattered
over the
fields to
fertilise
them.</note>
Again, the scattering of the Egyptian victim's ashes over
the fields resembles the Marimo and Khond custom,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</note> and the
use of winnowing-fans for the purpose is another hint of his
identification with the corn. So in Vendée a pretence is
made of threshing and winnowing the farmer's wife, regarded
as an embodiment of the corn-spirit; in Mexico the victim
was ground between stones; and in Africa he was slain with
spades and hoes.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</note> The story that the fragments of Osiris's
body were scattered up and down the land, and buried by
Isis on the spots where they lay,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18.</note> may very well be a reminiscence
of a custom, like that observed by the Khonds, of
dividing the human victim in pieces and burying the pieces,
often at intervals of many miles from each other, in the
fields.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>; and compare
<hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second Edition,
pp. 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> However, it is possible that the story of the dismemberment
of Osiris, like the similar story told of Tammuz,
may have been simply a mythical expression for the scattering
of the seed. Once more, the legend that the body of
Osiris enclosed in a coffer was thrown by Typhon into the
Nile, perhaps points to a custom of casting the body of the
victim, or at least a portion of it, into the Nile as a rain-charm,
or rather to make the river rise. For a similar
purpose Phrygian reapers seem to have flung the headless
bodies of their victims, wrapt in corn-sheaves, into a river,
and the Khonds poured water on the buried flesh of the
human victim. Probably when Osiris ceased to be represented
by a human victim, an image of him was annually
thrown into the Nile, just as the effigy of his Syrian counterpart,
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
Adonis, used to be cast into the sea at Alexandria.
Or water may have been simply poured over it, as on the
monument already mentioned<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</hi>, Second
Edition, p. 323.</note> a priest is seen pouring water
over the body of Osiris, from which corn-stalks are sprouting.
The accompanying legend, <q>This is Osiris of the
mysteries, who springs from the returning waters,</q> bears out
the view that at the mysteries of Osiris a charm to make
rain fall or the river rise was regularly wrought by pouring
water on his effigy or flinging it into the Nile.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The black
and green
Osiris like
the black
and green
Demeter.</note>
It may be objected that the red-haired victims were
slain as representatives, not of Osiris, but of his enemy
Typhon; for the victims were called Typhonian, and red
was the colour of Typhon, black the colour of Osiris.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 22, 30,
31, 33, 73.</note> The
answer to this objection must be reserved for the present.
Meantime it may be pointed out that if Osiris is often
represented on the monuments as black, he is still more
commonly depicted as green,<note place='foot'>Sir J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (ed.
1878), iii. 81.</note> appropriately enough for a
corn-god, who may be conceived as black while the seed is
under ground, but as green after it has sprouted. So the
Greeks recognised both a Green and a Black Demeter,<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 22. 3, viii. 5. 8, viii.
42. i.</note> and
sacrificed to the Green Demeter in spring with mirth and
gladness.<note place='foot'>Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>,
28. See above, p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The key
to the
mysteries
of Osiris
furnished
by the
lamentations
of the
reapers for
the annual
death of the
corn-spirit.</note>
Thus, if I am right, the key to the mysteries of Osiris is
furnished by the melancholy cry of the Egyptian reapers,
which down to Roman times could be heard year after year
sounding across the fields, announcing the death of the corn-spirit,
the rustic prototype of Osiris. Similar cries, as we
have seen, were also heard on all the harvest-fields of
Western Asia. By the ancients they are spoken of as songs;
but to judge from the analysis of the names Linus and
Maneros, they probably consisted only of a few words uttered
in a prolonged musical note which could be heard for a
great distance. Such sonorous and long-drawn cries, raised
by a number of strong voices in concert, must have had a
striking effect, and could hardly fail to arrest the attention
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
of any wayfarer who happened to be within hearing. The
sounds, repeated again and again, could probably be distinguished
with tolerable ease even at a distance; but to a
Greek traveller in Asia or Egypt the foreign words would
commonly convey no meaning, and he might take them, not
unnaturally, for the name of some one (Maneros, Linus,
Lityerses, Bormus) upon whom the reapers were calling.
And if his journey led him through more countries than one,
as Bithynia and Phrygia, or Phoenicia and Egypt, while the
corn was being reaped, he would have an opportunity of
comparing the various harvest cries of the different peoples.
Thus we can readily understand why these harvest cries
were so often noted and compared with each other by the
Greeks. Whereas, if they had been regular songs, they
could not have been heard at such distances, and therefore
could not have attracted the attention of so many travellers;
and, moreover, even if the wayfarer were within hearing of
them, he could not so easily have picked out the words.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Crying
<q>the neck</q>
at harvest
in Devonshire.</note>
Down to recent times Devonshire reapers uttered cries
of the same sort, and performed on the field a ceremony
exactly analogous to that in which, if I am not mistaken, the
rites of Osiris originated. The cry and the ceremony are
thus described by an observer who wrote in the first half of
the nineteenth century. <q>After the wheat is all cut, on
most farms in the north of Devon, the harvest people have
a custom of <q>crying the neck.</q> I believe that this practice
is seldom omitted on any large farm in that part of the
country. It is done in this way. An old man, or some one
else well acquainted with the ceremonies used on the
occasion (when the labourers are reaping the last field of
wheat), goes round to the shocks and sheaves, and picks out
a little bundle of all the best ears he can find; this bundle
he ties up very neat and trim, and plats and arranges the
straws very tastefully. This is called <q>the neck</q> of wheat,
or wheaten-ears. After the field is cut out, and the pitcher
once more circulated, the reapers, binders, and the women
stand round in a circle. The person with <q>the neck</q> stands
in the centre, grasping it with both his hands. He first
stoops and holds it near the ground, and all the men forming
the ring take off their hats, stooping and holding them
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
with both hands towards the ground. They then all begin
at once in a very prolonged and harmonious tone to cry
<q>The neck!</q> at the same time slowly raising themselves
upright, and elevating their arms and hats above their heads;
the person with <q>the neck</q> also raising it on high. This is
done three times. They then change their cry to <q>Wee
yen!</q>&mdash;<q>Way yen!</q>&mdash;which they sound in the same prolonged
and slow manner as before, with singular harmony
and effect, three times. This last cry is accompanied by the
same movements of the body and arms as in crying <q>the
neck.</q>... After having thus repeated <q>the neck</q> three
times, and <q>wee yen,</q> or <q>way yen</q> as often, they all burst
out into a kind of loud and joyous laugh, flinging up their
hats and caps into the air, capering about and perhaps
kissing the girls. One of them then gets 'the neck' and
runs as hard as he can down to the farmhouse, where the
dairymaid, or one of the young female domestics, stands at
the door prepared with a pail of water. If he who holds
<q>the neck</q> can manage to get into the house, in any way
unseen, or openly, by any other way than the door at which
the girl stands with the pail of water, then he may lawfully
kiss her; but, if otherwise, he is regularly soused with the
contents of the bucket. On a fine still autumn evening the
<q>crying of the neck</q> has a wonderful effect at a distance, far
finer than that of the Turkish muezzin, which Lord Byron
eulogises so much, and which he says is preferable to all the
bells in Christendom. I have once or twice heard upwards
of twenty men cry it, and sometimes joined by an equal
number of female voices. About three years back, on some
high grounds, where our people were harvesting, I heard six
or seven <q>necks</q> cried in one night, although I know that
some of them were four miles off. They are heard through
the quiet evening air at a considerable distance sometimes.</q><note place='foot'>W. Hone, <hi rend='italic'>Every-day Book</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), ii. coll. 1170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Again, Mrs. Bray tells how, travelling in Devonshire, <q>she
saw a party of reapers standing in a circle on a rising
ground, holding their sickles aloft. One in the middle held
up some ears of corn tied together with flowers, and the
party shouted three times (what she writes as) <q>Arnack,
arnack, arnack, we <foreign rend='italic'>haven</foreign>, we <foreign rend='italic'>haven</foreign>, we <foreign rend='italic'>haven</foreign>.</q> They went
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
home, accompanied by women and children carrying boughs
of flowers, shouting and singing. The manservant who
attended Mrs. Bray said <q>it was only the people making
their games, as they always did, <emph>to the spirit of harvest</emph>.</q></q><note place='foot'>Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F.
Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1883), pp. 372 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring to Mrs.
Bray's <hi rend='italic'>Traditions of Devon</hi>, i. 330.</note>
Here, as Miss Burne remarks, <q><q>arnack, we haven!</q> is
obviously in the Devon dialect, <q>a neck (or nack)! we have
un!</q></q> <q>The neck</q> is generally hung up in the farmhouse,
where it sometimes remains for two or three years.<note place='foot'>W. Hone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 1172.</note> A
similar custom is still observed in some parts of Cornwall,
as I was told by my lamented friend J. H. Middleton.
<q>The last sheaf is decked with ribbons. Two strong-voiced
men are chosen and placed (one with the sheaf) on opposite
sides of a valley. One shouts, <q>I've gotten it.</q> The other
shouts, <q>What hast gotten?</q> The first answers, <q>I'se gotten
the neck.</q></q><note place='foot'>The Rev. Sydney Cooper, of 80
Gloucester Street, Cirencester, wrote
to me (4th February 1893) that his
wife remembers the <q>neck</q> being
kept on the mantelpiece of the parlour
in a Cornish farmhouse; it generally
stayed there throughout the year.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other
accounts
of cutting
and crying
<q>the neck</q>
in Devonshire.</note>
Another account of this old custom, written at Truro in
1839, runs thus: <q>Now, when all the corn was cut at
Heligan, the farming men and maidens come in front of the
house, and bring with them a small sheaf of corn, the last
that has been cut, and this is adorned with ribbons and
flowers, and one part is tied quite tight, so as to look like a
neck. Then they cry out <q>Our (my) side, my side,</q> as loud
as they can; then the dairymaid gives the neck to the head
farming-man. He takes it, and says, very loudly three times,
<q>I have him, I have him, I have him.</q> Then another farming-man
shouts very loudly, <q>What have ye? what have ye?
what have ye?</q> Then the first says, <q>A neck, a neck, a
neck.</q> And when he has said this, all the people make a
very great shouting. This they do three times, and after
one famous shout go away and eat supper, and dance, and
sing songs.</q><note place='foot'><q>Old Harvest Customs in Devon
and Cornwall,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, i. (1890) p.
280.</note> According to another account, <q>all went out
to the field when the last corn was cut, the <q>neck</q> was tied
with ribbons and plaited, and they danced round it, and
carried it to the great kitchen, where by-and-by the supper
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
was. The words were as given in the previous account, and
<q>Hip, hip, hack, heck, I have 'ee, I have 'ee, I have 'ee.</q> It
was hung up in the hall.</q> Another account relates that one
of the men rushed from the field with the last sheaf, while the
rest pursued him with vessels of water, which they tried to
throw over the sheaf before it could be brought into the barn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cutting
<q>the neck</q>
in Pembrokeshire.</note>
Similar customs appear to have been formerly observed
in Pembrokeshire, as appears from the following account,
in which, however, nothing is said of the sonorous cries
raised by the reapers when their work was done: <q>At
harvest-time, in South Pembrokeshire, the last ears of
corn left standing in the field were tied together, and the
harvesters then tried to cut this neck by throwing their
hatchets at it. What happened afterwards appears to have
varied somewhat. I have been told by one old man that
the one who got possession of the neck would carry it over
into some neighbouring field, leave it there, and take to his
heels as fast as he could; for, if caught, he had a rough
time of it. The men who caught him would shut him up
in a barn without food, or belabour him soundly, or perhaps
shoe him, as it was called, beating the soles of his feet with
rods&mdash;a very severe and much-dreaded punishment. On
my grandfather's farm the man used to make for the house
as fast as possible, and try to carry in the neck. The maids
were on the look-out for him, and did their best to drench
him with water. If they succeeded, they got the present of
half-a-crown, which my grandfather always gave, and which
was considered a very liberal present indeed. If the man
was successful in dodging the maids, and getting the neck
into the house without receiving the wetting, the half-crown
became his. The neck was then hung up, and kept until
the following year, at any rate, like the bunches of flowers
or boughs gathered at the St. Jean, in the south of France.
Sometimes the necks of many successive years were to be
found hanging up together. In these two ways of disposing
of the neck one sees the embodiment, no doubt, of the two
ways of looking at the corn-spirit, as good (to be kept) or
as bad (to be passed on to the neighbour).</q><note place='foot'>Frances Hoggan, M.D., <q>The
Neck Feast,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, iv. (1893) p.
123. In Pembrokeshire the last sheaf
of corn seems to have been commonly
known as <q>the Hag</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>wrach</foreign>) rather
than as <q>the Neck.</q> See above,
pp. <ref target='Pg142'>142-144</ref>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cutting
<q>the neck</q>
in Shropshire.
Why the
last corn
cut is
called <q>the
neck.</q></note>
In the foregoing customs a particular bunch of ears,
generally the last left standing,<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii.
20 (Bohn's edition); Miss C. S. Burne
and Miss G. F. Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire
Folk-lore</hi>, p. 371.</note> is conceived as the neck
of the corn-spirit, who is consequently beheaded when the
bunch is cut down. Similarly in Shropshire the name
<q>neck,</q> or <q>the gander's neck,</q> used to be commonly given
to the last handful of ears left standing in the middle of
the field when all the rest of the corn was cut. It was
plaited together, and the reapers, standing ten or twenty
paces off, threw their sickles at it. Whoever cut it through
was said to have cut off the gander's neck. The <q>neck</q>
was taken to the farmer's wife, who was supposed to keep
it in the house for good luck till the next harvest came
round.<note place='foot'>Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Near Trèves, the man who reaps the last standing
corn <q>cuts the goat's neck off.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 185.</note> At Faslane, on the
Gareloch (Dumbartonshire), the last handful of standing
corn was sometimes called the <q>head.</q><note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</note> At Aurich, in
East Friesland, the man who reaps the last corn <q>cuts the
hare's tail off.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 185.</note> In mowing down the last corner of a field
French reapers sometimes call out, <q>We have the cat by the
tail.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> In Bresse (Bourgogne) the last sheaf represented the
fox. Beside it a score of ears were left standing to form
the tail, and each reaper, going back some paces, threw his
sickle at it. He who succeeded in severing it <q>cut off the
fox's tail,</q> and a cry of <q><foreign rend='italic'>You cou cou!</foreign></q> was raised in his
honour.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions populaires</hi>,
ii. (1887) p. 500.</note> These examples leave no room to doubt the
meaning of the Devonshire and Cornish expression <q>the
neck,</q> as applied to the last sheaf. The corn-spirit is conceived
in human or animal form, and the last standing corn
is part of its body&mdash;its neck, its head, or its tail. Sometimes,
as we have seen, the last corn is regarded as the
navel-string.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</note> Lastly, the Devonshire custom of drenching
with water the person who brings in <q>the neck</q> is a rain-charm,
such as we have had many examples of. Its parallel
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
in the mysteries of Osiris was the custom of pouring water on
the image of Osiris or on the person who represented him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Cries of the
reapers in
Germany.</note>
In Germany cries of <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul!</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wol!</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wôld!</foreign> are
sometimes raised by the reapers at cutting the last corn.
Thus in some places the last patch of standing rye was
called the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul</foreign>-rye; a stick decked with flowers was inserted
in it, and the ears were fastened to the stick. Then
all the reapers took off their hats and cried thrice, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul!</foreign>
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul!</foreign> <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul!</foreign></q> Sometimes they accompanied the cry by
clashing with their whetstones on their scythes.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, i. (1853)
pp. 170-173; U. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen
Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</hi>
(Breslau, 1884), pp. 166-169;
H. Pfannenschmid, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Erntefeste</hi>
(Hanover, 1878), pp. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A.
Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen
aus Westfalen</hi> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. pp.
177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, §§ 491, 492; A. Kuhn und
W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen,
Märchen und Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848),
p. 395), § 97; K. Lynker, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen</hi>
(Cassel and Göttingen, 1860), p. 256,
§ 340.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Corn-Spirit as an Animal.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Animal Embodiments of the Corn-Spirit.'/>
<head>§ 1. Animal Embodiments of the Corn-spirit.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as an
animal.</note>
In some of the examples which I have cited to establish
the meaning of the term <q>neck</q> as applied to the last sheaf,
the corn-spirit appears in animal form as a gander, a goat, a
hare, a cat, and a fox. This introduces us to a new aspect
of the corn-spirit, which we must now examine. By doing
so we shall not only have fresh examples of killing the god,
but may hope also to clear up some points which remain
obscure in the myths and worship of Adonis, Attis, Osiris,
Dionysus, Demeter, and Virbius.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in the
form of an
animal is
supposed
to be
present in
the last
corn cut or
threshed,
and to be
caught or
killed by
the reaper
or thresher.</note>
Amongst the many animals whose forms the corn-spirit is
supposed to take are the wolf, dog, hare, fox, cock, goose, quail,
cat, goat, cow (ox, bull), pig, and horse. In one or other of
these shapes the corn-spirit is often believed to be present in the
corn, and to be caught or killed in the last sheaf. As the corn
is being cut the animal flees before the reapers, and if a reaper
is taken ill on the field, he is supposed to have stumbled
unwittingly on the corn-spirit, who has thus punished the
profane intruder. It is said <q>the Rye-wolf has got hold of
him,</q> <q>the Harvest-goat has given him a push.</q> The person
who cuts the last corn or binds the last sheaf gets the name
of the animal, as the Rye-wolf, the Rye-sow, the Oats-goat,
and so forth, and retains the name sometimes for a year.
Also the animal is frequently represented by a puppet made
out of the last sheaf or of wood, flowers, and so on, which is
carried home amid rejoicings on the last harvest-waggon.
Even where the last sheaf is not made up in animal shape,
it is often called the Rye-wolf, the Hare, Goat, and so forth.
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
Generally each kind of crop is supposed to have its special
animal, which is caught in the last sheaf, and called the
Rye-wolf, the Barley-wolf, the Oats-wolf, the Pea-wolf, or the
Potato-wolf, according to the crop; but sometimes the figure
of the animal is only made up once for all at getting in the
last crop of the whole harvest. Sometimes the creature is
believed to be killed by the last stroke of the sickle or scythe.
But oftener it is thought to live so long as there is corn still
unthreshed, and to be caught in the last sheaf threshed.
Hence the man who gives the last stroke with the flail is told
that he has got the Corn-sow, the Threshing-dog, or the like.
When the threshing is finished, a puppet is made in the
form of the animal, and this is carried by the thresher of the
last sheaf to a neighbouring farm, where the threshing is still
going on. This again shews that the corn-spirit is believed
to live wherever the corn is still being threshed. Sometimes
the thresher of the last sheaf himself represents the animal;
and if the people of the next farm, who are still threshing,
catch him, they treat him like the animal he represents, by
shutting him up in the pig-sty, calling him with the cries
commonly addressed to pigs, and so forth.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>
(Berlin, 1868), pp. 1-6.</note> These general
statements will now be illustrated by examples.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Corn-spirit as a Wolf or a Dog.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Corn-spirit as a Wolf or a Dog.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
wolf or
a dog,
supposed
to run
through
the corn.</note>
We begin with the corn-spirit conceived as a wolf or
a dog. This conception is common in France, Germany,
and Slavonic countries. Thus, when the wind sets the
corn in wave-like motion the peasants often say, <q>The
Wolf is going over, or through, the corn,</q> <q>the Rye-wolf
is rushing over the field,</q> <q>the Wolf is in the corn,</q>
<q>the mad Dog is in the corn,</q> <q>the big Dog is there.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Danzig, 1866), pp. 6
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>
(Berlin, 1877), pp. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, p. 103; A.
Witzchel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna, 1878), p. 213;
O. Hartung, <q>Zur Volkskunde aus
Anhalt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins für
Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) p. 150; W.
Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Volkskunde der
Deutschen in Mähren</hi> (Vienna and
Olmütz, 1893), p. 327; P. Drechsler,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in
Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), ii,
60.</note>
When children wish to go into the corn-fields to pluck ears
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
or gather the blue corn-flowers, they are warned not to do so,
for <q>the big Dog sits in the corn,</q> or <q>the Wolf sits in the
corn, and will tear you in pieces,</q> <q>the Wolf will eat you.</q>
The wolf against whom the children are warned is not a
common wolf, for he is often spoken of as the Corn-wolf,
Rye-wolf, or the like; thus they say, <q>The Rye-wolf will
come and eat you up, children,</q> <q>the Rye-wolf will carry
you off,</q> and so forth.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Antike
Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 319.</note> Still he has all the outward appearance
of a wolf. For in the neighbourhood of Feilenhof (East
Prussia), when a wolf was seen running through a field, the
peasants used to watch whether he carried his tail in the air
or dragged it on the ground. If he dragged it on the
ground, they went after him, and thanked him for bringing
them a blessing, and even set tit-bits before him. But if he
carried his tail high, they cursed him and tried to kill him.
Here the wolf is the corn-spirit whose fertilising power is in
his tail.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
dog at
reaping
and
threshing.</note>
Both dog and wolf appear as embodiments of the corn-spirit
in harvest-customs. Thus in some parts of Silesia the
person who cuts or binds the last sheaf is called the Wheat-dog
or the Peas-pug.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 104; P. Drechsler,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in
Schlesien</hi>, ii. 64.</note> But it is in the harvest-customs of
the north-east of France that the idea of the Corn-dog comes
out most clearly. Thus when a harvester, through sickness,
weariness, or laziness, cannot or will not keep up with the
reaper in front of him, they say, <q>The White Dog passed
near him,</q> <q>he has the White Bitch,</q> or <q>the White Bitch
has bitten him.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 104.</note> In the Vosges the Harvest-May is called
the <q>Dog of the harvest,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the Harvest-May,
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and the person who cuts the last
handful of hay or wheat is said to <q>kill the Dog.</q><note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi>
(Paris, 1889), p. 191.</note> About
Lons-le-Saulnier, in the Jura, the last sheaf is called the
Bitch. In the neighbourhood of Verdun the regular expression
for finishing the reaping is, <q>They are going to kill the
Dog</q>; and at Epinal they say, according to the crop, <q>We
will kill the Wheat-dog, or the Rye-dog, or the
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
Potato-dog.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 105.</note> In Lorraine it is said of the man who cuts the
last corn, <q>He is killing the Dog of the harvest.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 30.</note> At
Dux, in the Tyrol, the man who gives the last stroke at
threshing is said to <q>strike down the Dog</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 30, 105.</note> and at Ahnebergen,
near Stade, he is called, according to the crop,
Corn-pug, Rye-pug, Wheat-pug.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 105 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
wolf at
reaping.</note>
So with the wolf. In Silesia, when the reapers gather
round the last patch of standing corn to reap it they are
said to be about <q>to catch the Wolf.</q><note place='foot'>P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 64.</note> In various parts of
Mecklenburg, where the belief in the Corn-wolf is particularly
prevalent, every one fears to cut the last corn, because they
say that the Wolf is sitting in it; hence every reaper exerts
himself to the utmost in order not to be the last, and every
woman similarly fears to bind the last sheaf because <q>the
Wolf is in it.</q> So both among the reapers and the binders
there is a competition not to be the last to finish.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 33, 39; K. Bartsch,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus
Meklenburg</hi> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii.
p. 309, § 1496, p. 310, §§ 1497,
1498.</note> And in
Germany generally it appears to be a common saying that
<q>the Wolf sits in the last sheaf.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 320.</note> In some places they call
out to the reaper, <q>Beware of the Wolf</q>; or they say, <q>He
is chasing the Wolf out of the corn.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 33.</note> In Mecklenburg the
last bunch of standing corn is itself commonly called the
Wolf, and the man who reaps it <q>has the Wolf,</q> the animal
being described as the Rye-wolf, the Wheat-wolf, the Barley-wolf,
and so on according to the particular crop. The reaper
of the last corn is himself called Wolf or the Rye-wolf, if the
crop is rye, and in many parts of Mecklenburg he has
to support the character by pretending to bite the other
harvesters or by howling like a wolf.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; K. Bartsch,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 309, § 1496, p. 310, §§
1497, 1500, 1501.</note> The last sheaf of
corn is also called the Wolf or the Rye-wolf or the Oats-wolf
according to the crop, and of the woman who binds it they
say, <q>The Wolf is biting her,</q> <q>She has the Wolf,</q> <q>She
must fetch the Wolf</q> (out of the corn). Moreover, she
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
herself is called Wolf; they cry out to her, <q>Thou art the
Wolf,</q> and she has to bear the name for a whole year;
sometimes, according to the crop, she is called the Rye-wolf
or the Potato-wolf.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 33, 34.</note> In the island of Rügen not only is the
woman who binds the last sheaf called Wolf, but when she
comes home she bites the lady of the house and the
stewardess, for which she receives a large piece of meat.
Yet nobody likes to be the Wolf. The same woman may
be Rye-wolf, Wheat-wolf, and Oats-wolf, if she happens to
bind the last sheaf of rye, wheat, and oats.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 38; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald-
und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 320.</note> At Buir, in the
district of Cologne, it was formerly the custom to give to the
last sheaf the shape of a wolf. It was kept in the barn till
all the corn was threshed. Then it was brought to the
farmer and he had to sprinkle it with beer or brandy.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At
Brunshaupten in Mecklenburg the young woman who bound
the last sheaf of wheat used to take a handful of stalks out
of it and make <q>the Wheat-wolf</q> with them; it was the
figure of a wolf about two feet long and half a foot high, the
legs of the animal being represented by stiff stalks and its
tail and mane by wheat-ears. This Wheat-wolf she carried
back at the head of the harvesters to the village, where it
was set up on a high place in the parlour of the farm and
remained there for a long time.<note place='foot'>K. Bartsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 311, §
1505.</note> In many places the sheaf
called the Wolf is made up in human form and dressed in
clothes. This indicates a confusion of ideas between the
corn-spirit conceived in human and in animal form. Generally
the Wolf is brought home on the last waggon with
joyful cries. Hence the last waggon-load itself receives the
name of the Wolf.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und
Roggenhund</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 35-37; K. Bartsch,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 309, § 1496, p. 310,
§§ 1499, 1501, p. 311, §§ 1506,
1507.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a wolf
killed at
threshing.</note>
Again, the Wolf is supposed to hide himself amongst the
cut corn in the granary, until he is driven out of the last
bundle by the strokes of the flail. Hence at Wanzleben,
near Magdeburg, after the threshing the peasants go in procession,
leading by a chain a man who is enveloped in the
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
threshed-out straw and is called the Wolf.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 321.</note> He represents
the corn-spirit who has been caught escaping from the
threshed corn. In the district of Treves it is believed that
the Corn-wolf is killed at threshing. The men thresh the
last sheaf till it is reduced to chopped straw. In this way
they think that the Corn-wolf, who was lurking in the last
sheaf, has been certainly killed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-wolf
at
harvest in
France.
The corn-wolf
killed
on the
harvest-field.</note>
In France also the Corn-wolf appears at harvest. Thus
they call out to the reaper of the last corn, <q>You will
catch the Wolf.</q> Near Chambéry they form a ring round
the last standing corn, and cry, <q>The Wolf is in there.</q>
In Finisterre, when the reaping draws near an end, the
harvesters cry, <q>There is the Wolf; we will catch him.</q>
Each takes a swath to reap, and he who finishes first calls
out, <q>I've caught the Wolf.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 320.</note> In Guyenne, when the last
corn has been reaped, they lead a wether all round the field.
It is called <q>the Wolf of the field.</q> Its horns are decked with
a wreath of flowers and corn-ears, and its neck and body are
also encircled with garlands and ribbons. All the reapers
march, singing, behind it. Then it is killed on the field. In this
part of France the last sheaf is called the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>coujoulage</foreign>, which, in
the patois, means a wether. Hence the killing of the wether
represents the death of the corn-spirit, considered as present
in the last sheaf; but two different conceptions of the corn-spirit&mdash;as
a wolf and as a wether&mdash;are mixed up together.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-wolf
at
midwinter.</note>
Sometimes it appears to be thought that the Wolf,
caught in the last corn, lives during the winter in the farmhouse,
ready to renew his activity as corn-spirit in the spring.
Hence at midwinter, when the lengthening days begin to
herald the approach of spring, the Wolf makes his appearance
once more. In Poland a man, with a wolf's skin
thrown over his head, is led about at Christmas; or a
stuffed wolf is carried about by persons who collect money.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 322.</note>
There are facts which point to an old custom of leading
about a man enveloped in leaves and called the Wolf, while
his conductors collected money.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 323.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Corn-spirit as a Cock.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Corn-spirit as a Cock.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
cock at
harvest.</note>
Another form which the corn-spirit often assumes is that
of a cock. In Austria children are warned against straying
in the corn-fields, because the Corn-cock sits there, and will
peck their eyes out.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 13.</note> In North Germany they say that <q>the
Cock sits in the last sheaf</q>; and at cutting the last corn the
reapers cry, <q>Now we will chase out the Cock.</q> When it is
cut they say, <q>We have caught the Cock.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; J. H. Schmitz,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Sagen, Lieder, Sprüchwörter
und Rathsel des Eifler Volkes</hi> (Treves,
1856-1858), i. 95; A. Kuhn und W.
Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen
und Gebräuche</hi> (Leipsic, 1848), p. 398.</note> At Braller, in
Transylvania, when the reapers come to the last patch of corn,
they cry, <q>Here we shall catch the Cock.</q><note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt, 1880),
p. 21.</note> At Fürstenwalde,
when the last sheaf is about to be bound, the master releases
a cock, which he has brought in a basket, and lets it run
over the field. All the harvesters chase it till they catch it.
Elsewhere the harvesters all try to seize the last corn cut;
he who succeeds in grasping it must crow, and is called
Cock.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 13. Compare A. Kuhn and W.
Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Among the Wends it is or used to be customary
for the farmer to hide a live cock under the last sheaf as it
lay on the field; and when the corn was being gathered up,
the harvester who lighted upon this sheaf had a right to
keep the cock, provided he could catch it. This formed the
close of the harvest-festival and was known as <q>the Cock-catching,</q>
and the beer which was served out to the reapers
at this time went by the name of <q>Cock-beer.</q><note place='foot'>K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. p. 232, No.
277 note.</note> The last
sheaf is called Cock, Cock-sheaf, Harvest-cock, Harvest-hen,
Autumn-hen. A distinction is made between a Wheat-cock,
Bean-cock, and so on, according to the crop.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 13.</note> At
Wünschensuhl, in Thüringen, the last sheaf is made into
the shape of a cock, and called the Harvest-cock.<note place='foot'>A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 220.</note> A
figure of a cock, made of wood, pasteboard, ears of corn,
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
or flowers, is borne in front of the harvest-waggon, especially
in Westphalia, where the cock carries in his beak fruits of
the earth of all kinds. Sometimes the image of the cock is
fastened to the top of a May-tree on the last harvest-waggon.
Elsewhere a live cock, or a figure of one, is attached to a
harvest-crown and carried on a pole. In Galicia and elsewhere
this live cock is fastened to the garland of corn-ears
or flowers, which the leader of the women-reapers carries on
her head as she marches in front of the harvest procession.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
pp. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. H. Schmitz, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und
Sagen, Lieder, Sprüchwörter und
Räthsel des Eifler Volkes</hi> (Treves, 1856-1858),
i. 95; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche
und Märchen aus Westfalen</hi>
(Leipsic, 1859), ii. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Pfannenschmid,
<hi rend='italic'>Germanische Erntefeste</hi>
(Hanover, 1878), p. 110.</note>
In Silesia a live cock is presented to the master on a plate.
The harvest-supper is called Harvest-cock, Stubble-cock, etc.,
and a chief dish at it, at least in some places, is a cock.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 14; H. Pfannenschmid, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
111, 419 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> If
a waggoner upsets a harvest-waggon, it is said that <q>he has
spilt the Harvest cock,</q> and he loses the cock, that is, the
harvest-supper.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 15. So in Shropshire, where the
corn-spirit is conceived in the form of
a gander (see above, p. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>), the
expression for overthrowing a load at
harvest is <q>to lose the goose,</q> and the
penalty used to be the loss of the goose
at the harvest-supper (C. S. Burne and
G. F. Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi>,
London, 1883, p. 375); and in some
parts of England the harvest-supper was
called the Harvest Gosling, or the
Inning Goose (J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
ii. 23, 26, Bohn's edition).</note> The harvest-waggon, with the figure of
the cock on it, is driven round the farmhouse before it is
taken to the barn. Then the cock is nailed over or at the
side of the house-door, or on the gable, and remains there
till next harvest.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 14.</note> In East Friesland the person who gives
the last stroke at threshing is called the Clucking-hen, and
grain is strewed before him as if he were a hen.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
killed
in the form
of a live
cock.</note>
Again, the corn-spirit is killed in the form of a cock.
In parts of Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Picardy the
reapers place a live cock in the corn which is to be cut last,
and chase it over the field, or bury it up to the neck in the
ground; afterwards they strike off its head with a sickle or
scythe.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 30.</note> In many parts of Westphalia, when the harvesters
bring the wooden cock to the farmer, he gives them a live
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
cock, which they kill with whips or sticks, or behead with
an old sword, or throw into the barn to the girls, or give to
the mistress to cook. If the harvest-cock has not been
spilt&mdash;that is, if no waggon has been upset&mdash;the harvesters
have the right to kill the farmyard cock by throwing stones
at it or beheading it. Where this custom has fallen into
disuse, it is still common for the farmer's wife to make
cockie-leekie for the harvesters, and to shew them the
head of the cock which has been killed for the soup.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 15.</note> In
the neighbourhood of Klausenburg, Transylvania, a cock is
buried on the harvest-field in the earth, so that only its head
appears. A young man then takes a scythe and cuts off
the cock's head at a single sweep. If he fails to do this,
he is called the Red Cock for a whole year, and people
fear that next year's crop will be bad.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Near Udvarhely,
in Transylvania, a live cock is bound up in the last sheaf
and killed with a spit. It is then skinned. The flesh
is thrown away, but the skin and feathers are kept till next
year; and in spring the grain from the last sheaf is mixed
with the feathers of the cock and scattered on the field which
is to be tilled.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 15; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>,
p. 30.</note> Nothing could set in a clearer light the
identification of the cock with the spirit of the corn. By
being tied up in the last sheaf and killed, the cock is identified
with the corn, and its death with the cutting of the corn.
By keeping its feathers till spring, then mixing them with
the seed-corn taken from the very sheaf in which the bird
had been bound, and scattering the feathers together with
the seed over the field, the identity of the bird with the corn
is again emphasised, and its quickening and fertilising power,
as an embodiment of the corn-spirit, is intimated in the
plainest manner. Thus the corn-spirit, in the form of a
cock, is killed at harvest, but rises to fresh life and activity
in spring. Again, the equivalence of the cock to the corn is
expressed, hardly less plainly, in the custom of burying the
bird in the ground, and cutting off its head (like the ears of
corn) with the scythe.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. The Corn-spirit as a Hare.'/>
<head>§ 4. The Corn-spirit as a Hare.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
hare at
harvest. The corn-spirit
as a
hare killed
in the last
corn cut.</note>
Another common embodiment of the corn-spirit is the
hare.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 1.</note> In Galloway the reaping of the last standing corn
is called <q>cutting the Hare.</q> The mode of cutting it is as
follows. When the rest of the corn has been reaped, a
handful is left standing to form the Hare. It is divided
into three parts and plaited, and the ears are tied in a knot.
The reapers then retire a few yards and each throws his or
her sickle in turn at the Hare to cut it down. It must be
cut below the knot, and the reapers continue to throw their
sickles at it, one after the other, until one of them succeeds
in severing the stalks below the knot. The Hare is then
carried home and given to a maidservant in the kitchen, who
places it over the kitchen-door on the inside. Sometimes
the Hare used to be thus kept till the next harvest. In the
parish of Minnigaff, when the Hare was cut, the unmarried
reapers ran home with all speed, and the one who arrived
first was the first to be married.<note place='foot'>W. Gregor, <q>Preliminary Report
on Folklore in Galloway, Scotland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Report of the British Association for
1896</hi>, p. 623.</note> In Southern Ayrshire the
last corn cut is also called the Hare, and the mode of cutting
it seems to be the same as in Galloway; at least in the neighbourhood
of Kilmarnock the last corn left standing in the
middle of the field is plaited, and the reapers used to try to
cut it by throwing their sickles at it. When cut, it was carried
home and hung up over the door.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. (1889) pp.
47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Vosges Mountains
the person who cuts the last handful of hay or wheat is sometimes
said to have caught the Hare; he is congratulated by
his comrades and has the honour of carrying the nosegay or
the small fir-tree decorated with ribbons which marks the conclusion
of the harvest.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi>
(Paris, 1889), p. 191.</note> In Germany also one of the names
for the last sheaf is the Hare.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 3.</note> Thus in some parts of
Anhalt, when the corn has been reaped and only a few stalks
are left standing, they say, <q>The Hare will soon come,</q> or
the reapers cry to each other, <q>Look how the Hare comes
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
jumping out.</q><note place='foot'>O. Hartung, <q>Zur Volkskunde
aus Anhalt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins für
Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) p. 154.</note> In East Prussia they say that the Hare sits in
the last patch of standing corn, and must be chased out by the
last reaper. The reapers hurry with their work, each being
anxious not to have <q>to chase out the Hare</q>; for the man
who does so, that is, who cuts the last corn, is much laughed
at.<note place='foot'>C. Lemke, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</hi>
(Mohrungen, 1884-1887), i.
24.</note> At Birk, in Transylvania, when the reapers come to the
last patch, they cry out, <q>We have the Hare.</q><note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</hi>
(Hermannstadt, 1880), p. 21.</note> At Aurich,
as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</note> an expression for cutting the last corn is
<q>to cut off the Hare's tail.</q> <q>He is killing the Hare</q> is
commonly said of the man who cuts the last corn in Germany,
Sweden, Holland, France, and Italy.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 29.</note> In Norway
the man who is thus said to <q>kill the Hare</q> must give
<q>hare's blood</q> in the form of brandy, to his fellows to
drink.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Korndämonen</hi>, p. 5.</note> In Lesbos, when the reapers are at work in two
neighbouring fields, each party tries to finish first in order
to drive the Hare into their neighbour's field; the reapers
who succeed in doing so believe that next year the crop
will be better. A small sheaf of corn is made up and kept
beside the holy picture till next harvest.<note place='foot'>Georgeakis et Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore de
Lesbos</hi> (Paris, 1894), p. 310.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. The Corn-spirit as a Cat.'/>
<head>§ 5. The Corn-spirit as a Cat.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a cat
sitting in
the corn.
The corn-spirit
as a
cat killed at reaping
and
threshing.</note>
Again, the corn-spirit sometimes takes the form of a cat.
Near Kiel children are warned not to go into the corn-fields
because <q>the Cat sits there.</q> In the Eisenach Oberland they
are told <q>the Corn-cat will come and fetch you,</q> <q>the Corn-cat
goes in the corn.</q> In some parts of Silesia at mowing
the last corn they say, <q>The Cat is caught</q>; and at threshing,
the man who gives the last stroke is called the Cat. In
the neighbourhood of Lyons the last sheaf and the harvest-supper
are both called the Cat. About Vesoul when they
cut the last corn they say, <q>We have the Cat by the tail.</q>
At Briançon, in Dauphiné, at the beginning of reaping a
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
cat is decked out with ribbons, flowers, and ears of corn. It
is called the Cat of the ball-skin (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>le chat de peau de balle</foreign>).
If a reaper is wounded at his work, they make the cat lick
the wound. At the close of the reaping the cat is again
decked out with ribbons and ears of corn; then they dance
and make merry. When the dance is over the girls solemnly
strip the cat of its finery. At Grüneberg, in Silesia, the
reaper who cuts the last corn goes by the name of the
Tom-cat. He is enveloped in rye-stalks and green withes,
and is furnished with a long plaited tail. Sometimes as a
companion he has a man similarly dressed, who is called the
(female) Cat. Their duty is to run after people whom they
see and to beat them with a long stick. Near Amiens the
expression for finishing the harvest is, <q>They are going to
kill the Cat</q>; and when the last corn is cut they kill a cat
in the farmyard. At threshing, in some parts of France, a
live cat is placed under the last bundle of corn to be
threshed, and is struck dead with the flails. Then on
Sunday it is roasted and eaten as a holiday dish.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, pp. 172-174; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 30; P.
Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube
in Schlesien</hi> (Leipsic, 1903-1906),
ii. 64, 65.</note> In the
Vosges Mountains the close of haymaking or harvest
is called <q>catching the cat,</q> <q>killing the dog,</q> or more
rarely <q>catching the hare.</q> The cat, the dog, or the hare
is said to be fat or lean according as the crop is good
or bad. The man who cuts the last handful of hay or of
wheat is said to catch the cat or the hare or to kill the dog.
He is congratulated by his comrades and has the honour of
carrying the nosegay or rather the small fir-tree decked
with ribbons which marks the end of the haymaking or of
the harvest.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le Folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), p. 191.</note> In Franche-Comté also the close of harvest is
called <q>catching or killing the cat.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Beauquier, <hi rend='italic'>Les Mois en
Franche-Comté</hi> (Paris, 1900), p. 102.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. The Corn-spirit as a Goat.'/>
<head>§ 6. The Corn-spirit as a Goat.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a goat
running
through
the corn
or sitting
in it.
The corn-goat
at
reaping
and
binding
the corn.</note>
Further, the corn-spirit often appears in the form of a
goat. In some parts of Prussia, when the corn bends before
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
the wind, they say, <q>The Goats are chasing each other,</q>
<q>the wind is driving the Goats through the corn,</q> <q>the
Goats are browsing there,</q> and they expect a very good
harvest. Again they say, <q>The Oats-goat is sitting in the
oats-field,</q> <q>the Corn-goat is sitting in the rye-field.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, pp. 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Children are warned not to go into the corn-fields to pluck
the blue corn-flowers, or amongst the beans to pluck pods,
because the Rye-goat, the Corn-goat, the Oats-goat, or the
Bean-goat is sitting or lying there, and will carry them away
or kill them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a harvester is taken sick or lags
behind his fellows at their work, they call out, <q>The Harvest-goat
has pushed him,</q> <q>he has been pushed by the Corn-goat.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 159.</note>
In the neighbourhood of Braunsberg (East Prussia)
at binding the oats every harvester makes haste <q>lest the
Corn-goat push him.</q> At Oefoten, in Norway, each reaper
has his allotted patch to reap. When a reaper in the middle
has not finished reaping his piece after his neighbours have
finished theirs, they say of him, <q>He remains on the island.</q>
And if the laggard is a man, they imitate the cry with which
they call a he-goat; if a woman, the cry with which they
call a she-goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> pp. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Near Straubing, in Lower Bavaria, it is said
of the man who cuts the last corn that <q>he has the Corn-goat,
or the Wheat-goat, or the Oats-goat,</q> according to
the crop. Moreover, two horns are set up on the last heap
of corn, and it is called <q>the horned Goat.</q> At Kreutzburg,
East Prussia, they call out to the woman who is binding the
last sheaf, <q>The Goat is sitting in the sheaf.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 162.</note> At Gablingen,
in Swabia, when the last field of oats upon a farm is
being reaped, the reapers carve a goat out of wood. Ears
of oats are inserted in its nostrils and mouth, and it is
adorned with garlands of flowers. It is set up on the field
and called the Oats-goat. When the reaping approaches an
end, each reaper hastens to finish his piece first; he who is
the last to finish gets the Oats-goat.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii.
pp. 232 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 426; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 162.</note> Again, the last sheaf
is itself called the Goat. Thus, in the valley of the Wiesent,
Bavaria, the last sheaf bound on the field is called the Goat,
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
and they have a proverb, <q>The field must bear a goat.</q><note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. pp. 228 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
§ 422; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald-
und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 163; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria,
Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs
Bayern</hi>, iii. (Munich, 1865) p. 344.</note> At
Spachbrücken, in Hesse, the last handful of corn which is
cut is called the Goat, and the man who cuts it is much
ridiculed.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 163.</note> At Dürrenbüchig and about Mosbach in Baden the
last sheaf is also called the Goat.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 428.</note> Sometimes the last sheaf
is made up in the form of a goat, and they say, <q>The Goat
is sitting in it.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 164.</note> Again, the person who cuts or binds the
last sheaf is called the Goat. Thus, in parts of Mecklenburg
they call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <q>You
are the Harvest-goat.</q> Near Uelzen, in Hanover, the harvest
festival begins with <q>the bringing of the Harvest-goat</q>;
that is, the woman who bound the last sheaf is wrapt in
straw, crowned with a harvest-wreath, and brought in a wheelbarrow
to the village, where a round dance takes place.
About Luneburg, also, the woman who binds the last corn is
decked with a crown of corn-ears and is called the Corn-goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 164.</note>
At Münzesheim in Baden the reaper who cuts the
last handful of corn or oats is called the Corn-goat or the
Oats-goat.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 428.</note> In the Canton St. Gall, Switzerland, the person
who cuts the last handful of corn on the field, or drives the
last harvest-waggon to the barn, is called the Corn-goat or the
Rye-goat, or simply the Goat.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Canton Thurgau he
is called Corn-goat; like a goat he has a bell hung round his
neck, is led in triumph, and drenched with liquor. In parts
of Styria, also, the man who cuts the last corn is called
Corn-goat, Oats-goat, or the like. As a rule, the man who
thus gets the name of Corn-goat has to bear it a whole year
till the next harvest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 165.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as the
Cripple
Goat in
Skye.</note>
According to one view, the corn-spirit, who has been
caught in the form of a goat or otherwise, lives in the farmhouse
or barn over winter. Thus, each farm has its own
embodiment of the corn-spirit. But, according to another
view, the corn-spirit is the genius or deity, not of the corn
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
of one farm only, but of all the corn. Hence when the corn
on one farm is all cut, he flees to another where there is still
corn left standing. This idea is brought out in a harvest-custom
which was formerly observed in Skye. The farmer
who first finished reaping sent a man or woman with a
sheaf to a neighbouring farmer who had not finished; the
latter in his turn, when he had finished, sent on the sheaf to
his neighbour who was still reaping; and so the sheaf made
the round of the farms till all the corn was cut. The sheaf
was called the <foreign rend='italic'>goabbir bhacagh</foreign>, that is, the Cripple Goat.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
ii. 24, Bohn's edition, quoting <hi rend='italic'>The
Gentleman's Magazine</hi> for February,
1795, p. 124; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 165.</note>
The custom appears not to be extinct at the present day,
for it was reported from Skye only a few years ago. We
are told that when the crofters and small farmers are cutting
down their corn, each tries his best to finish before his
neighbour. The first to finish goes to his neighbour's field
and makes up at one end of it a bundle of sheaves in a
fanciful shape which goes by the name of the <foreign rend='italic'>gobhar bhacach</foreign>
or Lame Goat. As each man in succession finishes reaping
his field, he proceeds to set up a lame goat of this sort in
his neighbour's field where there is still corn standing. No
one likes to have the Lame Goat put in his field, <q>not from
any ill-luck it brings, but because it is humiliating to have it
standing there visible to all neighbours and passers-by, and
of course he cannot retaliate.</q><note place='foot'>R. C. Maclagan, <q>Notes on folk-lore
objects collected in Argyleshire,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, vi. (1895) p. 151, from information
given by Mrs. C. Nicholson.</note> The corn-spirit was probably
thus represented as lame because he had been crippled
by the cutting of the corn. We have seen that sometimes
the old woman who brings home the last sheaf must limp
on one foot.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</note> In the Böhmer Wald mountains, between
Bohemia and Bavaria, when two peasants are driving home
their corn together, they race against each other to see who
shall get home first. The village boys mark the loser in the
race, and at night they come and erect on the roof of his
house the Oats-goat, which is a colossal figure of a goat made
of straw.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 165.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
killed
as a goat
on the
harvest-field.</note>
But sometimes the corn-spirit, in the form of a goat, is
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
believed to be slain on the harvest-field by the sickle or
scythe. Thus, in the neighbourhood of Bernkastel, on the
Moselle, the reapers determine by lot the order in which they
shall follow each other. The first is called the fore-reaper,
the last the tail-bearer. If a reaper overtakes the man in
front he reaps past him, bending round so as to leave the
slower reaper in a patch by himself. This patch is called
the Goat; and the man for whom <q>the Goat is cut</q> in this
way, is laughed and jeered at by his fellows for the rest of
the day. When the tail-bearer cuts the last ears of corn, it
is said, <q>He is cutting the Goat's neck off.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 166;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, p. 185.</note> In the neighbourhood
of Grenoble, before the end of the reaping, a live
goat is adorned with flowers and ribbons and allowed to run
about the field. The reapers chase it and try to catch it.
When it is caught, the farmer's wife holds it fast while the
farmer cuts off its head. The goat's flesh serves to furnish
the harvest-supper. A piece of the flesh is pickled and kept
till the next harvest, when another goat is killed. Then all
the harvesters eat of the flesh. On the same day the skin of
the goat is made into a cloak, which the farmer, who works
with his men, must always wear at harvest-time if rain or
bad weather sets in. But if a reaper gets pains in his back,
the farmer gives him the goat-skin to wear.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 166.</note> The reason
for this seems to be that the pains in the back, being inflicted
by the corn-spirit, can also be healed by it. Similarly, we
saw that elsewhere, when a reaper is wounded at reaping, a
cat, as the representative of the corn-spirit, is made to lick
the wound.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</note> Esthonian reapers in the island of Mon think
that the man who cuts the first ears of corn at harvest will
get pains in his back,<note place='foot'>J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. Heft 2
(Dorpat, 1872), p. 107.</note> probably because the corn-spirit is
believed to resent especially the first wound; and, in order to
escape pains in the back, Saxon reapers in Transylvania gird
their loins with the first handful of ears which they cut.<note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</hi>
(Hermannstadt, 1880), p. 19.
Compare W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
pp. 482 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Here, again, the corn-spirit is applied to for healing or protection,
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
but in his original vegetable form, not in the form of
a goat or a cat.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in the
form of a
goat supposed
to
lurk among
the corn in
the barn,
till he is
expelled by
the flail at
threshing.</note>
Further, the corn-spirit under the form of a goat is sometimes
conceived as lurking among the cut corn in the barn,
till he is driven from it by the threshing-flail. Thus in
Baden the last sheaf to be threshed is called the Corn-goat,
the Spelt-goat, or the Oats-goat according to the kind of
grain.<note place='foot'>E. L. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 436.</note> Again, near Marktl, in Upper Bavaria, the sheaves
are called Straw-goats or simply Goats. They are laid in
a great heap on the open field and threshed by two rows
of men standing opposite each other, who, as they ply
their flails, sing a song in which they say that they see the
Straw-goat amongst the corn-stalks. The last Goat, that is,
the last sheaf, is adorned with a wreath of violets and other
flowers and with cakes strung together. It is placed right
in the middle of the heap. Some of the threshers rush at
it and tear the best of it out; others lay on with their flails
so recklessly that heads are sometimes broken. In threshing
this last sheaf, each man casts up to the man opposite
him the misdeeds of which he has been guilty throughout
the year.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. pp. 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, § 421;
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>,
pp. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Oberinntal, in the Tyrol, the last thresher is
called Goat.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 168.</note> So at Haselberg, in West Bohemia, the man
who gives the last stroke at threshing oats is called the Oats-goat.<note place='foot'>A. John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 194.</note>
At Tettnang, in Würtemburg, the thresher who
gives the last stroke to the last bundle of corn before it is
turned goes by the name of the He-goat, and it is said, <q>He
has driven the He-goat away.</q> The person who, after the
bundle has been turned, gives the last stroke of all, is called
the She-goat.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 445, § 162; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 168.</note> In this custom it is implied that the corn is
inhabited by a pair of corn-spirits, male and female.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in the
form of a
goat passed
on to a
neighbour
who has
not finished
his
threshing.</note>
Further, the corn-spirit, captured in the form of a goat at
threshing, is passed on to a neighbour whose threshing is not
yet finished. In Franche Comté, as soon as the threshing is
over, the young people set up a straw figure of a goat on the
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
farmyard of a neighbour who is still threshing. He must
give them wine or money in return. At Ellwangen, in
Würtemburg, the effigy of a goat is made out of the last
bundle of corn at threshing; four sticks form its legs, and
two its horns. The man who gives the last stroke with
the flail must carry the Goat to the barn of a neighbour
who is still threshing and throw it down on the floor; if he
is caught in the act, they tie the goat on his back.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 169.</note> A
similar custom is observed at Indersdorf, in Upper Bavaria;
the man who throws the straw Goat into the neighbour's
barn imitates the bleating of a goat; if they catch him, they
blacken his face and tie the Goat on his back.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. pp. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 420;
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>,
p. 169.</note> At Zabern,
in Elsace, when a farmer is a week or more behind his neighbours
with his threshing, they set a real stuffed goat or fox
before his door.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 169.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in
goat form
killed at
threshing.</note>
Sometimes the spirit of the corn in goat form is believed
to be killed at threshing. In the district of Traunstein,
Upper Bavaria, they think that the Oats-goat is in the last
sheaf of oats. He is represented by an old rake set up on
end, with an old pot for a head. The children are then told
to kill the Oats-goat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 170.</note> Elsewhere, however, the corn-spirit
in the form of a goat is apparently thought to live in the
field throughout the winter. Hence at Wannefeld near
Gardelegen, and also between Calbe and Salzwedel, in the
Altmark, the last stalks used to be left uncut on the harvest-field
with the words, <q>That shall the He-goat keep!</q>
Evidently the last corn was here left as a provision for the
corn-spirit, lest, robbed of all his substance, he should die of
hunger. A stranger passing a harvest-field is sometimes
taken for the Corn-goat escaping in human shape from the
cut or threshed grain. Thus, when a stranger passes a
harvest-field, all the labourers stop and shout as with one
voice, <q>He-goat! He-goat!</q> At rape-seed threshing in
Schleswig, which is generally done on the field, the same
cry is raised if the stranger does not take off his hat.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 170. As to the custom
of leaving a little corn on the field for
the subsistence of the corn-spirit, see
above, pp. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Old
Prussian
custom of
killing a
goat at
sowing.</note>
At sowing their winter corn the old Prussians used to
kill a goat, consume its flesh with many superstitious ceremonies,
and hang the skin on a high pole near an oak and
a large stone. There it remained till harvest, when a great
bunch of corn and herbs was fastened to the pole above the
goat-skin. Then, after a prayer had been offered by a peasant
who acted as priest (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Weidulut</foreign>), the young folks joined hands
and danced round the oak and the pole. Afterwards they
scrambled for the bunch of corn, and the priest distributed
the herbs with a sparing hand. Then he placed the goat-skin
on the large stone, sat down on it, and preached to the
people about the history of their forefathers and their old
heathen customs and beliefs.<note place='foot'>M. Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>
(Berlin, 1871), pp. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp. 394 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The goat-skin thus suspended
on the field from sowing time to harvest perhaps represents
the corn-spirit superintending the growth of the corn. The
Tomori of Central Celebes imagine that the spirits which
cause rice to grow have the form of great goats with long
hair and long lips.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xliv. (1900) p.
241.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='7. The Corn-spirit as a Bull, Cow, or Ox.'/>
<head>§ 7. The Corn-spirit as a Bull, Cow, or Ox.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in the
form of a
bull
running
through
the corn or
lying in it.
The corn-spirit
as a
bull, ox, or
cow at
harvest.</note>
Another form which the corn-spirit often assumes is that
of a bull, cow, or ox. When the wind sweeps over the corn
they say at Conitz, in West Prussia, <q>The Steer is running
in the corn</q>;<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 58.</note> when the corn is thick and strong in one
spot, they say in some parts of East Prussia, <q>The Bull is
lying in the corn.</q> When a harvester has overstrained and
lamed himself, they say in the Graudenz district of West
Prussia, <q>The Bull pushed him</q>; in Lothringen they say,
<q>He has the Bull.</q> The meaning of both expressions is
that he has unwittingly lighted upon the divine corn-spirit,
who has punished the profane intruder with lameness.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> So
near Chambéry when a reaper wounds himself with his
sickle, it is said that he has <q>the wound of the Ox.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 62.</note> In
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
the district of Bunzlau (Silesia) the last sheaf is sometimes
made into the shape of a horned ox, stuffed with tow and
wrapt in corn-ears. This figure is called the Old Man.
In some parts of Bohemia the last sheaf is made up in
human form and called the Buffalo-bull.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 59.</note> These cases shew
a confusion of the human with the animal shape of the corn-spirit.
The confusion is like that of killing a wether under
the name of a wolf.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</note> In the Canton of Thurgau, Switzerland,
the last sheaf, if it is a large one, is called the Cow.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 59.</note>
All over Swabia the last bundle of corn on the field is called
the Cow; the man who cuts the last ears <q>has the Cow,</q>
and is himself called Cow or Barley-cow or Oats-cow, according
to the crop; at the harvest-supper he gets a nosegay of
flowers and corn-ears and a more liberal allowance of drink
than the rest. But he is teased and laughed at; so no one
likes to be the Cow.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), pp. 440 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, §§ 151, 152,
153; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 234, § 428; W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>,
p. 59.</note> The Cow was sometimes represented
by the figure of a woman made out of ears of corn and corn-flowers.
It was carried to the farmhouse by the man who
had cut the last handful of corn. The children ran after
him and the neighbours turned out to laugh at him, till the
farmer took the Cow from him.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. p. 233, §
427; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 59.</note> Here again the confusion
between the human and the animal form of the corn-spirit is
apparent. In various parts of Switzerland the reaper who
cuts the last ears of corn is called Wheat-cow, Corn-cow,
Oats-cow, or Corn-steer, and is the butt of many a joke.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In some parts of East Prussia, when a few ears of corn have
been left standing by inadvertence on the last swath, the
foremost reaper seizes them and cries, <q>Bull! Bull!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 58.</note> On
the other hand, in the district of Rosenheim, Upper Bavaria,
when a farmer is later of getting in his harvest than his
neighbours, they set up on his land a Straw-bull, as it is
called. This is a gigantic figure of a bull made of stubble
on a framework of wood and adorned with flowers and
leaves. Attached to it is a label on which are scrawled
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
doggerel verses in ridicule of the man on whose land the
Straw-bull is set up.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 58 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in the
form of a
bull or ox
killed at
the close
of the
reaping.</note>
Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a bull or ox is
killed on the harvest-field at the close of the reaping. At
Pouilly, near Dijon, when the last ears of corn are about to
be cut, an ox adorned with ribbons, flowers, and ears of corn
is led all round the field, followed by the whole troop of
reapers dancing. Then a man disguised as the Devil cuts
the last ears of corn and immediately slaughters the ox.
Part of the flesh of the animal is eaten at the harvest-supper;
part is pickled and kept till the first day of sowing
in spring. At Pont à Mousson and elsewhere on the evening
of the last day of reaping, a calf adorned with flowers and
ears of corn is led thrice round the farmyard, being allured
by a bait or driven by men with sticks, or conducted by the
farmer's wife with a rope. The calf chosen for this ceremony
is the calf which was born first on the farm in the spring of
the year. It is followed by all the reapers with their tools.
Then it is allowed to run free; the reapers chase it, and
whoever catches it is called King of the Calf. Lastly, it is
solemnly killed; at Lunéville the man who acts as butcher
is the Jewish merchant of the village.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
bull or
cow at
threshing.</note>
Sometimes again the corn-spirit hides himself amongst
the cut corn in the barn to reappear in bull or cow form at
threshing. Thus at Wurmlingen, in Thüringen, the man who
gives the last stroke at threshing is called the Cow, or rather
the Barley-cow, Oats-cow, Peas-cow, or the like, according
to the crop. He is entirely enveloped in straw; his head
is surmounted by sticks in imitation of horns, and two lads
lead him by ropes to the well to drink. On the way thither
he must low like a cow, and for a long time afterwards he
goes by the name of the Cow.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, pp. 444
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 162; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 61.</note> At Obermedlingen, in
Swabia, when the threshing draws near an end, each man
is careful to avoid giving the last stroke. He who does give
it <q>gets the Cow,</q> which is a straw figure dressed in an old
ragged petticoat, hood, and stockings. It is tied on his back
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
with a straw-rope; his face is blackened, and being bound
with straw-ropes to a wheelbarrow he is wheeled round
the village.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 233, § 427.</note> Here, again, we meet with that confusion
between the human and animal shape of the corn-spirit
which we have noted in other customs. In Canton Schaffhausen
the man who threshes the last corn is called the
Cow; in Canton Thurgau, the Corn-bull; in Canton Zurich,
the Thresher-cow. In the last-mentioned district he is
wrapt in straw and bound to one of the trees in the orchard.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
At Arad, in Hungary, the man who gives the last stroke at
threshing is enveloped in straw and a cow's hide with the
horns attached to it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 62.</note> At Pessnitz, in the district of Dresden,
the man who gives the last stroke with the flail is called
Bull. He must make a straw-man and set it up before a
neighbour's window.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 62.</note> Here, apparently, as in so many
cases, the corn-spirit is passed on to a neighbour who has
not finished threshing. So at Herbrechtingen, in Thüringen,
the effigy of a ragged old woman is flung into the barn of
the farmer who is last with his threshing. The man who
throws it in cries, <q>There is the Cow for you.</q> If the
threshers catch him they detain him over night and punish
him by keeping him from the harvest-supper.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, pp. 445
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, § 163.</note> In these
latter customs the confusion between the human and the
animal shape of the corn-spirit meets us again.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
in the
form of a
bull supposed
to be
killed at
threshing.</note>
Further, the corn-spirit in bull form is sometimes believed
to be killed at threshing. At Auxerre, in threshing the last
bundle of corn, they call out twelve times, <q>We are killing
the Bull.</q> In the neighbourhood of Bordeaux, where a
butcher kills an ox on the field immediately after the close
of the reaping, it is said of the man who gives the last
stroke at threshing that <q>he has killed the Bull.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 60.</note> At
Chambéry the last sheaf is called the sheaf of the Young
Ox, and a race takes place to it in which all the reapers
join. When the last stroke is given at threshing they
say that <q>the Ox is killed</q>; and immediately thereupon
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
a real ox is slaughtered by the reaper who cut the last
corn. The flesh of the ox is eaten by the threshers at
supper.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 62.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
calf at
harvest or
in spring.</note>
We have seen that sometimes the young corn-spirit,
whose task it is to quicken the corn of the coming year, is
believed to be born as a Corn-baby on the harvest-field.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Similarly in Berry the young corn-spirit is sometimes
supposed to be born on the field in calf form; for when a
binder has not rope enough to bind all the corn in sheaves,
he puts aside the wheat that remains over and imitates the
lowing of a cow. The meaning is that <q>the sheaf has given
birth to a calf.</q><note place='foot'>Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi> (Paris,
1875), ii. 135.</note> In Puy-de-Dôme when a binder cannot
keep up with the reaper whom he or she follows, they say
<q>He (or she) is giving birth to the Calf.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 62: <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Il fait le veau.</foreign></q></note> In some parts of
Prussia, in similar circumstances, they call out to the woman,
<q>The Bull is coming,</q> and imitate the bellowing of a bull.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note>
In these cases the woman is conceived as the Corn-cow or
old corn-spirit, while the supposed calf is the Corn-calf or
young corn-spirit. In some parts of Austria a mythical calf
(<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Muhkälbchen</foreign>) is believed to be seen amongst the sprouting
corn in spring and to push the children; when the corn waves
in the wind they say, <q>The Calf is going about.</q> Clearly, as
Mannhardt observes, this calf of the spring-time is the same
animal which is afterwards believed to be killed at reaping.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 63.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='8. The Corn-spirit as a Horse or Mare.'/>
<head>§ 8. The Corn-spirit as a Horse or Mare.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
horse or
mare
running
through
the corn.
<q>Crying
the Mare</q>
in Hertfordshire
and Shropshire.</note>
Sometimes the corn-spirit appears in the shape of a
horse or mare. Between Kalw and Stuttgart, when the corn
bends before the wind, they say, <q>There runs the Horse.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> p. 167.</note>
At Bohlingen, near Radolfzell in Baden, the last sheaf of
oats is called the Oats-stallion.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 428.</note> In Hertfordshire, at the
end of the reaping, there is or used to be observed a ceremony
called <q>crying the Mare.</q> The last blades of corn left
standing on the field are tied together and called the Mare.
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
The reapers stand at a distance and throw their sickles at
it; he who cuts it through <q>has the prize, with acclamations
and good cheer.</q> After it is cut the reapers cry thrice with
a loud voice, <q>I have her!</q> Others answer thrice, <q>What
have you?</q>&mdash;<q>A Mare! a Mare! a Mare!</q>&mdash;<q>Whose is
she?</q> is next asked thrice. <q>A. B.'s,</q> naming the owner
thrice. <q>Whither will you send her?</q>&mdash;<q>To C. D.,</q> naming
some neighbour who has not reaped all his corn.<note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 24, Bohn's edition.</note> In this
custom the corn-spirit in the form of a mare is passed on
from a farm where the corn is all cut to another farm where
it is still standing, and where therefore the corn-spirit may
be supposed naturally to take refuge. In Shropshire the
custom is similar. <q rend='pre'>Crying, calling, or shouting the mare is
a ceremony performed by the men of that farm which is the
first in any parish or district to finish the harvest. The
object of it is to make known their own prowess, and to
taunt the laggards by a pretended offer of the <q>owd mar'</q>
[old mare] to help out their <q>chem</q> [team]. All the men
assemble (the wooden harvest-bottle being of course one of
the company) in the stackyard, or, better, on the highest
ground on the farm, and there shout the following dialogue,
preceding it by a grand <q>Hip, hip, hip, hurrah!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>I 'ave 'er, I 'ave 'er, I 'ave 'er!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Whad 'ast thee, whad 'ast thee, whad 'ast thee?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>A mar'! a mar'! a mar'!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Whose is 'er, whose is 'er, whose is 'er?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Maister A.'s, Maister A.'s, Maister A.'s!</q> (naming the
farmer whose harvest is finished).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>W'eer sha't the' send 'er? w'eer sha't the' send 'er?
w'eer sha't the' send 'er?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>To Maister B.'s, to Maister B.'s, to Maister B.'s</q>
(naming one whose harvest is <emph>not</emph> finished).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>'Uth a hip, hip, hip, hurrah!</q> (in chorus).</q>
</p>

<p>
The farmer who finishes his harvest last, and who
therefore cannot send the Mare to any one else, is said
<q>to keep her all winter.</q> The mocking offer of the Mare
was sometimes responded to by a mocking acceptance of
her help. Thus an old man told an enquirer, <q>While we
wun at supper, a mon cumm'd wi' a autar [halter] to fatch
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
her away.</q> But at one place (Longnor, near Leebotwood),
down to about 1850, the Mare used really to be sent.
<q>The head man of the farmer who had finished harvest
first was mounted on the best horse of the team&mdash;the
leader&mdash;both horse and man being adorned with ribbons,
streamers, etc. Thus arrayed, a boy on foot led the pair in
triumph to the neighbouring farmhouses. Sometimes the
man who took the <q>mare</q> received, as well as plenty of
harvest-ale, some rather rough, though good-humoured, treatment,
coming back minus his decorations, and so on.</q><note place='foot'>C. F. Burne and G. F. Jackson,
<hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1883),
pp. 373 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as a
horse in
France.</note>
In the neighbourhood of Lille the idea of the corn-spirit
in horse form is clearly preserved. When a harvester grows
weary at his work, it is said, <q>He has the fatigue of the
Horse.</q> The first sheaf, called the <q>Cross of the Horse,</q> is
placed on a cross of boxwood in the barn, and the youngest
horse on the farm must tread on it. The reapers dance
round the last blades of corn, crying, <q>See the remains of the
Horse.</q> The sheaf made out of these last blades is given
to the youngest horse of the parish (<foreign rend='italic'>commune</foreign>) to eat. This
youngest horse of the parish clearly represents, as Mannhardt
says, the corn-spirit of the following year, the Corn-foal,
which absorbs the spirit of the old Corn-horse by eating the
last corn cut; for, as usual, the old corn-spirit takes his
final refuge in the last sheaf. The thresher of the last
sheaf is said to <q>beat the Horse.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 167. We may compare
the Scotch custom of giving the
last sheaf to a horse or mare to eat.
See above, pp. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</note> Again, a trace of the
horse-shaped corn-spirit is reported from Berry. The
harvesters there are accustomed to take a noonday nap
in the field. This is called <q>seeing the Horse.</q> The leader
or <q>King</q> of the harvesters gives the signal for going to
sleep. If he delays giving the signal, one of the harvesters
will begin to neigh like a horse, the rest imitate him, and
then they all go <q>to see the Horse.</q><note place='foot'>Laisnel de la Salle, <hi rend='italic'>Croyances et
Légendes du Centre de la France</hi> (Paris,
1875), ii. 133; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, pp. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
We have seen (above, p. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>) that in
South Pembrokeshire the man who cut
the <q>Neck</q> used to be <q>shod,</q> that
is, to have the soles of his feet severely
beaten with sods. Perhaps he was
thus treated as representing the corn-spirit
in the form of a horse.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='9. The Corn-spirit as a Bird.'/>
<head>§ 9. The Corn-spirit as a Bird.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a quail.
The rice-spirit
as a
blue bird. The rice-spirit
as
a quail.</note>
Sometimes the corn-spirit assumes the form of a bird.
Thus among the Saxons of the Bistritz district in Transylvania
there is a saying that the quail is sitting in the last
standing stalks on the harvest-field, and all the reapers rush
at these stalks in order, as they say, to catch the quail.<note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermannstadt, 1880),
p. 21.</note>
Exactly the same expression is used by reapers in Austrian
Silesia when they are about to cut the last standing corn,
whatever the kind of grain may be.<note place='foot'>A. Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Völksthumliches aus
Österreichisch-Schlesien</hi> (Troppau,
1865-1867), ii. 268.</note> In the Bocage of
Normandy, when the reapers have come to the last ears of
the last rig, they surround them for the purpose of catching
the quail, which is supposed to have taken refuge there. They
run about the corn crying, <q>Mind the Quail!</q> and make
believe to grab at the bird amid shouts and laughter.<note place='foot'>J. Lecoeur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887),
ii. 240.</note>
Connected with this identification of the corn-spirit with a
quail is probably the belief that the cry of the bird in spring
is prophetic of the price of corn in the autumn; in Germany
they say that corn will sell at as many gulden a bushel as
the quail uttered its cry over the fields in spring. Similar
prognostications are drawn from the note of the bird in
central and western France, in Switzerland and in Tuscany.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volks
aberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin, 1869), p. 189,
§ 277; Chr. Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und
Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck,
1867), p. 238; Rev. Ch. Swainson,
<hi rend='italic'>The Folk Lore and Provincial Names of
British Birds</hi> (London, 1886), p. 173.</note>
Perhaps one reason for identifying the quail with the corn-spirit
is that the bird lays its eggs on the ground, without
making much of a nest.<note place='foot'>Alfred Newton, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of
Birds</hi>, New Edition (London, 1893-1896),
p. 755.</note> Similarly the Toradjas of Central
Celebes think that the soul of the rice is embodied in a
pretty little blue bird which builds its nest in the rice-field
at the time when the rice is beginning to germinate, and
which disappears again after the harvest. Thus both the
place and the time of the appearance of the bird suggest to
the natives the notion that the blue bird is the rice incarnate.
And like the note of the quail in Europe the note of this
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
little bird in Celebes is believed to prognosticate the state
of the harvest, foretelling whether the rice will be abundant
or scarce. Nobody may drive the bird away; to do so
would not merely injure the rice, it would hurt the eyes of
the sacrilegious person and might even strike him blind.
In Minahassa, a district in the north of Celebes, a similar
though less definite belief attaches to a sort of small quail
which loves to haunt the rice-fields before the rice is reaped;
and when the Galelareeze of Halmahera hear a certain kind
of bird, which they call <foreign rend='italic'>togè</foreign>, croaking among the rice in ear,
they say that the bird is putting the grain into the rice, so
they will not kill it.<note place='foot'>A. C. Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische
aanteekeningen omtrent de
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xliv. (1900) pp.
228, 229; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>De rijstmoeder in den
Indischen Archipel,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verslagen en
Mededeelingen van der koninklijke
Akademie van Wetenschappen</hi>, Afdeeling
Letterkunde, Vierde Reeks, v.,
part 3 (Amsterdam, 1903), pp. 374
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='10. The Corn-spirit as a Fox.'/>
<head>§ 10. The Corn-spirit as a Fox.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a fox
running
through
the corn or
sitting in it.
The corn-spirit
as a
fox at
reaping
the last
corn. The corn-spirit
as a
fox at
threshing.
The
Japanese
rice-god
associated
with the
fox.</note>
Another animal whose shape the corn-spirit is sometimes
thought to assume is the fox. The conception is recorded
at various places in Germany and France. Thus at Nördlingen
in Bavaria, when the corn waves to and fro in the
wind, they say, <q>The fox goes through the corn,</q> and at
Usingen in Nassau they say, <q>The foxes are marching
through the corn.</q> At Ravensberg, in Westphalia, and at
Steinau, in Kurhessen, children are warned against straying
in the corn, <q>because the Fox is there.</q> At Campe, near
Stade, when they are about to cut the last corn, they call
out to the reaper, <q>The Fox is sitting there, hold him fast!</q>
In the Department of the Moselle they say, <q>Watch
whether the Fox comes out.</q> In Bourbonnais the expression
is, <q>You will catch the Fox.</q> When a reaper
wounds himself or is sick at reaping, they say in the Lower
Loire that <q>He has the Fox.</q> In Côte-d'or they say, <q>He
has killed the Fox.</q> At Louhans, in Sâone-et-Loire, when
the reapers are cutting the last corn they leave a handful
standing and throw their sickles at it. He who hits it is
called the Fox, and two girls deck his bonnet with flowers.
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
In the evening there is a dance, at which the Fox dances
with all the girls. The supper which follows is also called
the Fox; they say, <q>We have eaten the Fox,</q> meaning that
they have partaken of the harvest-supper. In the Canton
of Zurich the last sheaf is called the Fox. At Bourgogne,
in Ain, they cry out, <q>The Fox is sitting in the last sheaf,</q>
and having made the figure of an animal out of white cloth
and some ears of the last corn, they dub it the Fox and
throw it into the house of a neighbour who has not yet got
in all his harvest.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 109 note 2.</note> In Poitou, when the corn is being
reaped in a district, all the reapers strive to finish as quickly
as possible in order that they may send <q>the Fox</q> to the
fields of a farmer who has not yet garnered his sheaves.
The man who cuts the last handful of standing corn is said
to <q>have the Fox.</q> This last handful is carried to the
farmer's house and occupies a place on the table during the
harvest-supper; and the custom is to drench it with water.
After that it is set up on the chimney-piece and remains
there the whole year.<note place='foot'>L. Pineau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore du Poitou</hi>
(Paris, 1892), pp. 500 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At threshing, also, in Sâone-et-Loire,
the last sheaf is called the Fox; in Lot they say,
<q>We are going to beat the Fox</q>; and at Zabern in Alsace
they set a stuffed fox before the door of the threshing-floor
of a neighbour who has not finished his threshing.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, note 2.</note> With
this conception of the fox as an embodiment of the corn-spirit
may possibly be connected an old custom, observed in
Holstein and Westphalia, of carrying a dead or living fox
from house to house in spring; the intention of the custom
was perhaps to diffuse the refreshing and invigorating
influence of the reawakened spirit of vegetation.<note place='foot'>J. F. L. Woeste, <hi rend='italic'>Völksüberlieferungen
in der Grafschaft Mark</hi> (Iserlohn,
1848), p. 27; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, p. 110 note.</note> In Japan
the rice-god Inari is represented as an elderly man with a
long beard riding on a white fox, and the fox is always
associated with this deity. In front of his shrines may
usually be seen a pair of foxes carved in wood or stone.<note place='foot'>Lafcadio Hearn, <hi rend='italic'>Glimpses of Unfamiliar
Japan</hi> (London, 1894), ii.
312 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. G. Aston, <hi rend='italic'>Shinto</hi>
(London, 1905), pp. 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> At the
festival of the Roman corn-goddess
Ceres, celebrated on the nineteenth of
April, foxes were allowed to run about
with burning torches tied to their tails,
and the custom was explained as a
punishment inflicted on foxes because
a fox had once in this way burned
down the crops (Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv.
679 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). Samson is said to have
burned the crops of the Philistines in
a similar fashion (Judges xv. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).
Whether the custom and the tradition
are connected with the idea of the fox
as an embodiment of the corn-spirit is
doubtful. Compare W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
W. Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>Roman Festivals
of the Period of the Republic</hi> (London,
1899), pp. 77-79.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='11. The Corn-spirit as a Pig (Boar or Sow).'/>
<head>§ 11. The Corn-spirit as a Pig (Boar or Sow).</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a boar
rushing
through
the corn.
The corn-spirit
as a
boar or
sow at
reaping.
The corn-spirit
as a
sow at
threshing.</note>
The last animal embodiment of the corn-spirit which we
shall notice is the pig (boar or sow). In Thüringen, when
the wind sets the young corn in motion, they sometimes say,
<q>The Boar is rushing through the corn.</q><note place='foot'>A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi> (Vienna,
1878), p. 213, § 4. So at Klepzig, in
Anhalt (<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift des Vereins für
Volkskunde</hi>, vii. (1897) p. 150).</note> Amongst the
Esthonians of the island of Oesel the last sheaf is called the
Rye-boar, and the man who gets it is saluted with a cry of
<q>You have the Rye-boar on your back!</q> In reply he
strikes up a song, in which he prays for plenty.<note place='foot'>J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. Heft 2 (Dorpat,
1872), p. 107; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>, p. 187.</note> At
Kohlerwinkel, near Augsburg, at the close of the harvest,
the last bunch of standing corn is cut down, stalk by stalk,
by all the reapers in turn. He who cuts the last stalk <q>gets
the Sow,</q> and is laughed at.<note place='foot'>A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Aus Schwaben</hi> (Wiesbaden,
1874), ii. 328.</note> In other Swabian villages
also the man who cuts the last corn <q>has the Sow,</q> or <q>has
the Rye-sow.</q><note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii.
pp. 223, 224, §§ 417, 419.</note> In the Traunstein district, Upper Bavaria,
the man who cuts the last handful of rye or wheat <q>has
the Sow,</q> and is called Sow-driver.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 112.</note> At Bohlingen, near
Radolfzell in Baden, the last sheaf is called the Rye-sow or
the Wheat-sow, according to the crop; and at Röhrenbach
in Baden the person who brings the last armful for the last
sheaf is called the Corn-sow or the Oats-sow. And in the
south-east of Baden the thresher who gives the last stroke at
threshing, or is the last to hang up his flail on the wall, is
called the Sow or the Rye-sow.<note place='foot'>E. L. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches Volksleben</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), pp. 428, 436.</note> At Friedingen, in Swabia,
the thresher who gives the last stroke is called Sow&mdash;Barley-sow,
Corn-sow, or the like, according to the crop.
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
At Onstmettingen the man who gives the last stroke at
threshing <q>has the Sow</q>; he is often bound up in a sheaf
and dragged by a rope along the ground.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebaüche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 445, § 162.</note> And, generally,
in Swabia the man who gives the last stroke with the flail is
called Sow. He may, however, rid himself of this invidious
distinction by passing on to a neighbour the straw-rope,
which is the badge of his position as Sow. So he goes to a
house and throws the straw-rope into it, crying, <q>There, I
bring you the Sow.</q> All the inmates give chase; and if
they catch him they beat him, shut him up for several hours
in the pig-sty, and oblige him to take the <q>Sow</q> away
again.<note place='foot'>A. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861-1862),
 ii. p. 425, § 379.</note> In various parts of Upper Bavaria the man who
gives the last stroke at threshing must <q>carry the Pig</q>&mdash;that
is, either a straw effigy of a pig or merely a bundle of straw-ropes.
This he carries to a neighbouring farm where the
threshing is not finished, and throws it into the barn. If the
threshers catch him they handle him roughly, beating him,
blackening or dirtying his face, throwing him into filth,
binding the Sow on his back, and so on; if the bearer of
the Sow is a woman they cut off her hair. At the harvest
supper or dinner the man who <q>carried the Pig</q> gets one
or more dumplings made in the form of pigs; sometimes he
gets a large dumpling and a number of small ones, all in
pig form, the large one being called the sow and the small
ones the sucking-pigs. Sometimes he has the right to be
the first to put his hand into the dish and take out as many
small dumplings (<q>sucking-pigs</q>) as he can, while the other
threshers strike at his hand with spoons or sticks. When
the dumplings are served up by the maid-servant, all the
people at table cry <q>Süz, süz, süz!</q> that being the cry used
in calling pigs. Sometimes after dinner the man who <q>carried
the Pig</q> has his face blackened, and is set on a cart and
drawn round the village by his fellows, followed by a crowd
crying <q>Süz, süz, süz!</q> as if they were calling swine.
Sometimes, after being wheeled round the village, he is flung
on the dunghill.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. pp. 221-224, §§ 409,
410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 418.</note>
</p>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
as
a pig at
sowing.</note>
Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a pig plays his part
at sowing-time as well as at harvest At Neuautz, in Courland,
when barley is sown for the first time in the year, the
farmer's wife boils the chine of a pig along with the tail,
and brings it to the sower on the field. He eats of it, but
cuts off the tail and sticks it in the field; it is believed that
the ears of corn will then grow as long as the tail.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here
the pig is the corn-spirit, whose fertilising power is sometimes
supposed to lie especially in his tail.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>; compare <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</note> As a pig he is
put in the ground at sowing-time, and as a pig he reappears
amongst the ripe corn at harvest. For amongst the neighbouring
Esthonians, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>.</note> the last sheaf is called
the Rye-boar. Somewhat similar customs are observed in
Germany. In the Salza district, near Meiningen, a certain
bone in the pig is called <q>the Jew on the winnowing-fan.</q>
The flesh of this bone is boiled on Shrove Tuesday, but the
bone is put amongst the ashes which the neighbours exchange
as presents on St. Peter's Day (the twenty-second of
February), and then mix with the seed-corn.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 187.</note> In the whole
of Hesse, Meiningen, and other districts, people eat pea-soup
with dried pig-ribs on Ash Wednesday or Candlemas. The
ribs are then collected and hung in the room till sowing-time,
when they are inserted in the sown field or in the seed-bag
amongst the flax seed. This is thought to be an infallible
specific against earth-fleas and moles, and to cause the flax
to grow well and tall.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 187
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, pp. 189,
218; W. Kolbe, <hi rend='italic'>Hessische Volks-Sitten
und Gebräuche</hi> (Marburg, 1888),
p. 35.</note> In many parts of White Russia
people eat a roast lamb or sucking-pig at Easter, and then
throw the bones backwards upon the fields, to preserve the
corn from hail.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 188; W. R. S. Ralston,
<hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>
(London, 1872), p. 220.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The corn-spirit
embodied
in
the Yule
Boar of
Scandinavia. The Yule
straw in
Sweden.</note>
But the idea of the corn-spirit as embodied in pig form
is nowhere more clearly expressed than in the Scandinavian
custom of the Yule Boar. In Sweden and Denmark at
Yule (Christmas) it is the custom to bake a loaf in the form
of a boar-pig. This is called the Yule Boar. The corn of
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
the last sheaf is often used to make it. All through Yule
the Yule Boar stands on the table. Often it is kept till the
sowing-time in spring, when part of it is mixed with the
seed-corn and part given to the ploughmen and plough-horses
or plough-oxen to eat, in the expectation of a good
harvest.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, pp. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. Panzer,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii.
491; J. Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Etymological
Dictionary of the Scottish Language</hi>,
New Edition (Paisley, 1879-1882),
vol. iii. pp. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Maiden</q>;
Arv. Aug. Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen und
Volkslieder aus Schwedens älterer und
neuerer Zeit</hi>, übersetzt von F. H.
Ungewitter (Leipsic, 1842), i. 9.</note> In this custom the corn-spirit, immanent in the
last sheaf, appears at midwinter in the form of a boar made
from the corn of the last sheaf; and his quickening influence
on the corn is shewn by mixing part of the Yule Boar with
the seed-corn, and giving part of it to the ploughman and
his cattle to eat. Similarly we saw that the Corn-wolf
makes his appearance at midwinter, the time when the year
begins to verge towards spring.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</note> We may conjecture that
the Yule straw, which Swedish peasants turn to various
superstitious uses, comes, in part at least, from the sheaf out
of which the Yule Boar is made. The Yule straw is long
rye-straw, a portion of which is always set apart for this
season. It is strewn over the floor at Christmas, and the
peasants attribute many virtues to it. For example, they
think that some of it scattered on the ground will make a
barren field productive. Again, the peasant at Christmas
seats himself on a log; and his eldest son or daughter, or the
mother herself, if the children are not old enough, places a
wisp of the Yule straw on his knee. From this he draws
out single straws, and throws them, one by one, up to the
ceiling; and as many as lodge in the rafters, so many will
be the sheaves of rye he will have to thresh at harvest.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), pp. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 182.
On Christmas night children sleep on
a bed of the Yule straw (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> p. 177).</note>
Again, it is only the Yule straw which may be used in binding
the fruit-trees as a charm to fertilise them.<note place='foot'>U. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche</hi>
(Breslau, 1884), p. 215.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 17, 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These uses
of the Yule straw shew that it is believed to possess fertilising
virtues analogous to those ascribed to the Yule Boar;
we may therefore fairly conjecture that the Yule straw is
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
made from the same sheaf as the Yule Boar. Formerly a
real boar was sacrificed at Christmas,<note place='foot'>A. A. Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 31.</note> and apparently also
a man in the character of the Yule Boar. This, at least,
may perhaps be inferred from a Christmas custom still
observed in Sweden. A man is wrapt up in a skin, and
carries a wisp of straw in his mouth, so that the projecting
straws look like the bristles of a boar. A knife is brought,
and an old woman, with her face blackened, pretends to
sacrifice him.<note place='foot'>A. A. Afzelius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 9; L.
Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>, pp.
181, 185.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Christmas
Boar
among the
Esthonians.</note>
On Christmas Eve in some parts of the Esthonian
island of Oesel they bake a long cake with the two ends
turned up. It is called the Christmas Boar, and stands
on the table till the morning of New Year's Day, when
it is distributed among the cattle. In other parts of the
island the Christmas Boar is not a cake but a little pig
born in March, which the housewife fattens secretly, often
without the knowledge of the other members of the family.
On Christmas Eve the little pig is secretly killed, then
roasted in the oven, and set on the table standing on all
fours, where it remains in this posture for several days. In
other parts of the island, again, though the Christmas cake
has neither the name nor the shape of a boar, it is kept till
the New Year, when half of it is divided among all the
members and all the quadrupeds of the family. The other
half of the cake is kept till sowing-time comes round, when
it is similarly distributed in the morning among human
beings and beasts.<note place='foot'>J. B. Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der gelehrten Estnischen
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. Heft 2
(Dorpat, 1872), pp. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In other parts of Esthonia, again, the
Christmas Boar, as it is called, is baked of the first rye cut
at harvest; it has a conical shape and a cross is impressed
on it with a pig's bone or a key, or three dints are made in
it with a buckle or a piece of charcoal. It stands with a
light beside it on the table all through the festal season.
On New Year's Day and Epiphany, before sunrise, a little of
the cake is crumbled with salt and given to the cattle. The
rest is kept till the day when the cattle are driven out to
pasture for the first time in spring. It is then put in the
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
herdsman's bag, and at evening is divided among the cattle
to guard them from magic and harm. In some places the
Christmas Boar is partaken of by farm-servants and cattle
at the time of the barley sowing, for the purpose of thereby
producing a heavier crop.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1876), pp. 344, 485.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='12. On the Animal Embodiments of the Corn-spirit.'/>
<head>§ 12. On the Animal Embodiments of the Corn-spirit.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacramental
character
of the
harvest-supper.</note>
So much for the animal embodiments of the corn-spirit
as they are presented to us in the folk-customs of Northern
Europe. These customs bring out clearly the sacramental
character of the harvest-supper. The corn-spirit is conceived
as embodied in an animal; this divine animal is slain, and
its flesh and blood are partaken of by the harvesters. Thus,
the cock, the goose, the hare, the cat, the goat, and the ox
are eaten sacramentally by the harvesters, and the pig is
eaten sacramentally by ploughmen in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>,
<ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>. In regard to the hare,
the substitution of brandy for hare's
blood is probably modern.</note> Again, as
a substitute for the real flesh of the divine being, bread or
dumplings are made in his image and eaten sacramentally;
thus, pig-shaped dumplings are eaten by the harvesters, and
loaves made in boar-shape (the Yule Boar) are eaten in
spring by the ploughman and his cattle.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Parallelism
between the
conceptions
of the
corn-spirit
in human
and animal
forms.</note>
The reader has probably remarked the complete parallelism
between the conceptions of the corn-spirit in human
and in animal form. The parallel may be here briefly
resumed. When the corn waves in the wind it is said
either that the Corn-mother or that the Corn-wolf, etc.,
is passing through the corn. Children are warned against
straying in corn-fields either because the Corn-mother or
because the Corn-wolf, etc., is there. In the last corn cut or
the last sheaf threshed either the Corn-mother or the Corn-wolf,
etc., is supposed to be present. The last sheaf is itself
called either the Corn-mother or the Corn-wolf, etc., and is
made up in the shape either of a woman or of a wolf, etc.
The person who cuts, binds, or threshes the last sheaf is
called either the Old Woman or the Wolf, etc., according to
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
the name bestowed on the sheaf itself. As in some places
a sheaf made in human form and called the Maiden, the
Mother of the Maize, etc., is kept from one harvest to the
next in order to secure a continuance of the corn-spirit's
blessing; so in some places the Harvest-cock and in others
the flesh of the goat is kept for a similar purpose from one
harvest to the next. As in some places the grain taken
from the Corn-mother is mixed with the seed-corn in spring
to make the crop abundant; so in some places the feathers
of the cock, and in Sweden the Yule Boar, are kept till spring
and mixed with the seed-corn for a like purpose. As part
of the Corn-mother or Maiden is given to the cattle at
Christmas or to the horses at the first ploughing, so part of
the Yule Boar is given to the ploughing horses or oxen in
spring. Lastly, the death of the corn-spirit is represented by
killing or pretending to kill either his human or his animal
representative; and the worshippers partake sacramentally
either of the actual body and blood of the representative
of the divinity, or of bread made in his likeness.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The reason
why the
corn-spirit
is thought
to take the
forms of so
many animals
may
be that wild
creatures
are commonly
penned by
the advance
of the
reapers into
the last
patch of
standing
corn, which
is usually
regarded as
the last
refuge of
the corn-spirit.</note>
Other animal forms assumed by the corn-spirit are the
stag, roe, sheep, bear, ass, mouse, stork, swan, and kite.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi> (Berlin, 1868), p. 1.</note>
If it is asked why the corn-spirit should be thought to
appear in the form of an animal and of so many different
animals, we may reply that to primitive man the simple
appearance of an animal or bird among the corn is probably
enough to suggest a mysterious link between the creature
and the corn; and when we remember that in the old days,
before fields were fenced in, all kinds of animals must have
been free to roam over them, we need not wonder that the
corn-spirit should have been identified even with large
animals like the horse and cow, which nowadays could not,
except by a rare accident, be found straying in an English
corn-field. This explanation applies with peculiar force to
the very common case in which the animal embodiment of
the corn-spirit is believed to lurk in the last standing corn.
For at harvest a number of wild animals, such as hares,
rabbits, and partridges, are commonly driven by the progress
of the reaping into the last patch of standing corn, and
make their escape from it as it is being cut down. So
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
regularly does this happen that reapers and others often
stand round the last patch of corn armed with sticks or
guns, with which they kill the animals as they dart out of
their last refuge among the stalks. Now, primitive man, to
whom magical changes of shape seem perfectly credible,
finds it most natural that the spirit of the corn, driven from
his home in the ripe grain, should make his escape in the
form of the animal which is seen to rush out of the last
patch of corn as it falls under the scythe of the reaper.
Thus the identification of the corn-spirit with an animal
is analogous to the identification of him with a passing
stranger. As the sudden appearance of a stranger near the
harvest-field or threshing-floor is, to the primitive mind,
enough to identify him as the spirit of the corn escaping
from the cut or threshed corn, so the sudden appearance of
an animal issuing from the cut corn is enough to identify
it with the corn-spirit escaping from his ruined home. The
two identifications are so analogous that they can hardly be
dissociated in any attempt to explain them. Those who
look to some other principle than the one here suggested
for the explanation of the latter identification are bound
to shew that their theory covers the former identification
also.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note. The Pleiades in Primitive Calendars.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Importance
of the
Pleiades in
primitive
calendars.</note>
The constellation of the Pleiades plays an important part in the
calendar of primitive peoples, both in the northern and in the
southern hemisphere; indeed for reasons which at first sight are
not obvious savages appear to have paid more attention to this
constellation than to any other group of stars in the sky, and in
particular they have commonly timed the various operations of the
agricultural year by observation of its heliacal rising or setting.
Some evidence on the subject was adduced by the late Dr. Richard
Andree,<note place='foot'>R. Andree, <q>Die Pleiaden im
Mythus und in ihrer Beziehung zum
Jahresbeginn und Landbau,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>,
lxiv. (1893) pp. 362-366.</note> but much more exists, and it may be worth while to put
certain of the facts together.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades
by the
Australian
aborigines.</note>
In the first place it deserves to be noticed that great attention
has been paid to the Pleiades by savages in the southern hemisphere
who do not till the ground, and who therefore lack that incentive to
observe the stars which is possessed by peoples in the agricultural
stage of society; for we can scarcely doubt that in early ages the
practical need of ascertaining the proper seasons for sowing and
planting has done more than mere speculative curiosity to foster
a knowledge of astronomy by compelling savages to scrutinise the
great celestial clock for indications of the time of year. Now
amongst the rudest of savages known to us are the Australian
aborigines, none of whom in their native state ever practised
agriculture. Yet we are told that <q>they do, according to their
manner, worship the hosts of heaven, and believe particular constellations
rule natural causes. For such they have names, and
sing and dance to gain the favour of the Pleiades (<foreign rend='italic'>Mormodellick</foreign>),
the constellation worshipped by one body as the giver of rain; but
if it should be deferred, instead of blessings curses are apt to be
bestowed upon it.</q><note place='foot'>Mr. McKellar, quoted by the Rev.
W. Ridley, <q>Report on Australian
Languages and Traditions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, ii. (1873)
p. 279; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kamilaroi</hi> (Sydney, 1875),
p. 138. Mr. McKellar's evidence was
given before a Select Committee of the
Legislative Council of Victoria in 1858;
from which we may perhaps infer that
his statement refers especially to the
tribes of Victoria or at all events of
south-eastern Australia. It seems to
be a common belief among the aborigines
of central and south-eastern
Australia that the Pleiades are women
who once lived on earth but afterwards
went up into the sky. See W. E. Stanbridge,
in <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S. i. (1861)
p. 302; P. Beveridge, <q>Of the Aborigines
inhabiting the great Lacustrine
and Riverine Depression of the Lower
Murray,</q> etc., <hi rend='italic'>Journal and Proceedings
of the Royal Society of New South Wales</hi>,
xvii. (Sydney, 1884) p. 61; Baldwin
Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Tribes of Central Australia</hi> (London,
1899), p. 566; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Northern Tribes
of Central Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
p. 628; A. W. Howitt, <hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of
South-East Australia</hi> (London, 1904),
pp. 429 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Some tribes of Victoria
believed that the Pleiades were originally
a queen and six of her attendants,
but that the Crow (Waa) fell in love
with the queen and ran away with her,
and that since then the Pleiades have
been only six in number. See James
Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi> (Melbourne,
Sydney, and Adelaide, 1881),
p. 100.</note> According to a writer, whose evidence on
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
other matters of Australian beliefs is open to grave doubt, some of
the aborigines of New South Wales denied that the sun is the
source of heat, because he shines also in winter when the weather is
cold; the real cause of warm weather they held to be the Pleiades,
because as the summer heat increases, that constellation rises higher
and higher in the sky, reaching its greatest elevation in the height
of summer, and gradually sinking again in autumn as the days grow
cooler, till in winter it is either barely visible or lost to view
altogether.<note place='foot'>J. Manning, <q>Notes on the
Aborigines of New Holland,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
New South Wales</hi>, xvi. (Sydney, 1883)
p. 168.</note> Another writer, who was well acquainted with the
natives of Victoria in the early days of the colony and whose testimony
can be relied upon, tells us that an old chief of the Spring
Creek tribe <q>taught the young people the names of the favourite
planets and constellations, as indications of the seasons. For
example, when Canopus is a very little above the horizon in the
east at daybreak, the season for emu eggs has come; when the
Pleiades are visible in the east an hour before sunrise, the time
for visiting friends and neighbouring tribes is at hand.</q><note place='foot'>James Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 75.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the Indians
of Paraguay
and
Brazil.</note>
Again, the Abipones of Paraguay, who neither sowed nor reaped,<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de Abiponibus</hi>
(Vienna, 1784), ii. 118.</note>
nevertheless regarded the Pleiades as an image of their ancestor.
As that constellation is invisible in the sky of South America
for several months every year, the Abipones believed that their
ancestor was then sick, and they were dreadfully afraid that he
would die. But when the constellation reappeared in the month
of May, they saluted the return of their ancestor with joyous shouts
and the glad music of flutes and horns, and they congratulated
him on his recovery from sickness. Next day they all went out to
collect wild honey, from which they brewed a favourite beverage.
Then at sunset they feasted and kept up the revelry all night by the
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
light of torches, while a sorceress, who presided at the festivity,
shook her rattle and danced. But the proceedings were perfectly
decorous; the sexes did not mix with each other.<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
101-105.</note> The Mocobis of
Paraguay also looked upon the Pleiades as their father and creator.<note place='foot'>Pedro de Angelis, <hi rend='italic'>Coleccion de
Obras y Documentes relativos a la
Historia antigua y moderna de las
Provincias del Rio de la Plata</hi> (Buenos
Ayres, 1836-1837), iv. 15.</note>
The Guaycurus of the Gran Chaco used to rejoice greatly at the
reappearance of the Pleiades. On this occasion they held a festival
at which men and women, boys and girls all beat each other soundly,
believing that this brought them health, abundance, and victory over
their enemies.<note place='foot'>P. Lozano, <hi rend='italic'>Descripcion chorographico
del terreno, rios, arboles, y
animales del Gran Chaco</hi> (Cordova,
1733). p. 67.</note> Amongst the Lengua Indians of Paraguay at the
present day the rising of the Pleiades is connected with the beginning
of spring, and feasts are held at this time, generally of a markedly
immoral character.<note place='foot'>W. Barbrooke Grubb, <hi rend='italic'>An Unknown
People in an Unknown Land</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 139.</note> The Guaranis of Paraguay knew the time of
sowing by observation of the Pleiades;<note place='foot'>Pedro de Angelis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iv. 14.</note> they are said to have
revered the constellation and to have dated the beginning of their
year from the rising of the constellation in May.<note place='foot'>Th. Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie der
Naturvölker</hi>, iii. (Leipsic, 1862) p. 418,
referring to Marcgrav de Liebstadt,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. rerum naturalium Brasil</hi>. (Amsterdam,
1648), viii. 5 and 12.</note> The Tapuiyas,
formerly a numerous and warlike tribe of Brazil, hailed the rising
of the Pleiades with great respect, and worshipped the constellation
with songs and dances.<note place='foot'>M. Dobrizhoffer, <hi rend='italic'>Historia de Abiponibus</hi>,
ii. 104.</note> The Indians of north-western
Brazil, an agricultural people who subsist mainly by the cultivation
of manioc, determine the time for their various field
labours by the position of certain constellations, especially the
Pleiades; when that constellation has sunk beneath the horizon,
the regular, heavy rains set in.<note place='foot'>Th. Koch-Grünberg, <hi rend='italic'>Zwei Jahre
unter den Indianern</hi> (Berlin, 1909-1910),
ii. 203.</note> The Omagua Indians of Brazil
ascribe to the Pleiades a special influence on human destiny.<note place='foot'>C. F. Phil. v. Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie
Amerika's, zumal Brasiliens</hi>
(Leipsic, 1867), p. 441.</note>
A Brazilian name for the Pleiades is <hi rend='italic'>Cyiuce</hi>, that is, <q>Mother
of those who are thirsty.</q> The constellation, we are told, <q>is
known to the Indians of the whole of Brasil and appears to
be even worshipped by some tribes in Matto Grosso. In the
valley of the Amazon a number of popular sayings are current
about it. Thus they say that in the first days of its appearance
in the firmament, while it is still low, the birds and especially the
fowls sleep on the lower branches or perches, and that just as it
rises so do they; that it brings much cold and rain; that when the
constellation vanishes, the serpents lose their venom; that the reeds
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
used in making arrows must be cut before the appearance of the
Pleiades, else they will be worm-eaten. According to the legend
the Pleiades disappear in May and reappear in June. Their
reappearance coincides with the renewal of vegetation and of animal
life. Hence the legend relates that everything which appears before
the constellation is renewed, that is, the appearance of the Pleiades,
marks the beginning of spring.</q><note place='foot'>Carl Teschauer, S.J., <q>Mythen
und alte Volkssagen aus Brasilien,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, i. (1906) p. 736.</note> The Indians of the Orinoco
called the Pleiades <foreign rend='italic'>Ucasu</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Cacasau</foreign>, according to their dialect,
and they dated the beginning of their year from the time when these
stars are visible in the east after sunset.<note place='foot'>J. Gumilla, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Naturelle et
Civile et Géographique de l'Orenoque</hi>
(Avignon, 1758), iii. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the Indians
of Peru and
Mexico.</note>
By the Indians of Peru <q>the Pleiades were called <foreign rend='italic'>Collca</foreign>
(the maize-heap): in this constellation the Peruvians both of
the sierra and the coast beheld the prototype of their cherished
stores of corn. It made their maize to grow, and was worshipped
accordingly.</q><note place='foot'>E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the New
World called America</hi>, i. (Oxford,
1892) p. 492.</note> When the Pleiades appeared above the horizon on or
about Corpus Christi Day, these Indians celebrated their chief festival
of the year and adored the constellation <q>in order that the maize
might not dry up.</q><note place='foot'>P. J. de Arriaga, <hi rend='italic'>Extirpacion de
la Idolatria del Piru</hi> (Lima, 1621),
pp. 11, 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to Arriaga,
the Peruvian name for the Pleiades is
<foreign rend='italic'>Oncoy</foreign>.</note> Adjoining the great temple of the Sun at Cuzco
there was a cloister with halls opening off it. One of these halls
was dedicated to the Moon, and another to the planet Venus, the
Pleiades, and all the other stars. The Incas venerated the Pleiades
because of their curious position and the symmetry of their shape.<note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>First Part
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</hi>,
translated by (Sir) Clements R. Markham
(London, 1869-1871, Hakluyt
Society), i. 275. Compare J. de
Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Natural and Moral History of
the Indies</hi> (London, 1880, Hakluyt
Society), ii. 304.</note>
The tribes of Vera Cruz, on the coast of Mexico, dated the beginning
of their year from the heliacal setting of the Pleiades, which in the
latitude of Vera Cruz (19° N.) in the year 1519 fell on the first of
May of the Gregorian calendar.<note place='foot'>E. Seler, <hi rend='italic'>Alt-Mexikanische Studien</hi>,
ii. (Berlin, 1899) pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring
to Petrus Martyr, <hi rend='italic'>De nuper sub D.
Carolo repertis insulis</hi> (Basileae, 1521),
p. 15.</note> The Aztecs appear to have attached
great importance to the Pleiades, for they timed the most solemn
and impressive of all their religious ceremonies so as to coincide with
the moment when that constellation was in the middle of the sky at
midnight. The ceremony consisted in kindling a sacred new fire
on the breast of a human victim on the last night of a great period
of fifty-two years. They expected that at the close of one of these
periods the stars would cease to revolve and the world itself would
come to an end. Hence, when the critical moment approached,
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
the priests watched from the top of a mountain the movement of
the stars, and especially of the Pleiades, with the utmost anxiety.
When that constellation was seen to cross the meridian, great was the
joy; for they knew that the world was respited for another fifty-two
years. Immediately the bravest and handsomest of the captives
was thrown down on his back; a board of dry wood was placed on
his breast, and one of the priests made fire by twirling a stick
between his hands on the board. As soon as the flame burst
forth, the breast of the victim was cut open, his heart was torn out,
and together with the rest of his body was thrown into the fire.
Runners carried the new fire at full speed to all parts of the kingdom
to rekindle the cold hearths; for every fire throughout the
country had been extinguished as a preparation for this solemn rite.<note place='foot'>B. de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire Générale
des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</hi> (Paris,
1880), pp. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 489 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. de
Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>General History of the Vast
Continent and Islands of America</hi>,
translated by Capt. J. Stevens (London,
1725-1726), iii. 222; F. S. Clavigero,
<hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, translated by C.
Cullen (London, 1807), i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. G.
Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der amerikanischen
Urreligionen</hi> (Bâle, 1867), pp. 519 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>The Native Races of
the Pacific States of North America</hi>
(London, 1875-1876), iii. 393-395.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the North
American
Indians.</note>
The Blackfeet Indians of North America <q>know and observe
the Pleiades, and regulate their most important feast by those stars.
About the first and the last days of the occultation of the Pleiades
there is a sacred feast among the Blackfeet. The mode of observance
is national, the whole of the tribe turning out for the celebration
of its rites, which include two sacred vigils, the solemn blessing
and planting of the seed. It is the opening of the agricultural
season.... In all highly religious feasts the calumet, or pipe, is
always presented towards the Pleiades, with invocation for life-giving
goods. The women swear by the Pleiades as the men do by
the sun or the morning star.</q> At the general meeting of the nation
there is a dance of warriors, which is supposed to represent the
dance of the seven young men who are identified with the Pleiades.
For the Indians say that the seven stars of the constellation were
seven brothers, who guarded by night the field of sacred seed and
danced round it to keep themselves awake during the long hours of
darkness.<note place='foot'>Jean l'Heureux, <q>Ethnological
Notes on the Astronomical Customs
and Religious Ideas of the Chokitapia
or Blackfeet Indians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xv. (1886)
pp. 301-303.</note> According to another legend told by the Blackfeet, the
Pleiades are six children, who were so ashamed because they had
no little yellow hides of buffalo calves that they wandered away on
the plains and were at last taken up into the sky. <q>They are not
seen during the moon, when the buffalo calves are yellow (spring,
the time of their shame), but, every year, when the calves turn
brown (autumn), the lost children can be seen in the sky every
night.</q><note place='foot'>Walter McClintock, <hi rend='italic'>The Old North
Trail</hi> (London, 1910), p. 490.</note> This version of the myth, it will be observed, recognises
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
only six stars in the constellation, and many savages apparently see
no more, which speaks ill for the keenness of their vision; since
among ourselves persons endowed with unusually good sight are
able, I understand, to discern seven. Among the Pueblo Indians
of Tusayan, an ancient province of Arizona, the culmination of the
Pleiades is often used to determine the proper time for beginning
a sacred nocturnal rite, especially an invocation addressed to the six
deities who are believed to rule the six quarters of the world. The
writer who records this fact adds: <q>I cannot explain its significance,
and why of all stellar objects this minute cluster of stars of a
low magnitude is more important than other stellar groups is not
clear to me.</q><note place='foot'>J. Walter Fewkes, <q>The Tusayan
New Fire Ceremony,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of
the Boston Society of Natural History</hi>,
xxvi. (1895) p. 453.</note> If the Pueblo Indians see only six stars in the
cluster, as to which I cannot speak, it might seem to them a reason
for assigning one of the stars to each of the six quarters, namely,
north, south, east, west, above, and below.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the Polynesians.</note>
The Society Islanders in the South Pacific divided the year into
two seasons, which they determined by observation of the Pleiades.
<q>The first they called <foreign rend='italic'>Matarii i nia</foreign>, Pleiades above. It commenced
when, in the evening, these stars appeared on or near the horizon;
and the half year, during which, immediately after sunset, they were
seen above the horizon, was called <foreign rend='italic'>Matarii i nia</foreign>. The other season
commenced when, at sunset, the stars were invisible, and continued
until at that hour they appeared again above the horizon. This
season was called <foreign rend='italic'>Matarii i raro</foreign>, Pleiades below.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>,
Second Edition (London,
1832-1836), i. 87.</note> In the Hervey
Islands of the South Pacific it is said that the constellation was
originally a single star, which was shattered into six fragments by
the god Tane. <q>This cluster of little stars is appropriately named
Mata-riki or <emph>little-eyes</emph>, on account of their brightness. It is also
designated Tau-ono, or <emph>the-six</emph>, on account of the apparent number
of the fragments; the presence of the seventh star not having been
detected by the unassisted native eye.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and
Songs from the South Pacific</hi> (London,
1876), p. 43.</note> Among these islanders the
arrival of the new year was indicated by the appearance of the constellation
on the eastern horizon just after sunset, that is, about the middle
of December. <q>Hence the idolatrous worship paid to this beautiful
cluster of stars in many of the South Sea Islands. The Pleiades
were worshipped at Danger Island, and at the Penrhyns, down to
the introduction of Christianity in 1857. In many islands extravagant
joy is still manifested at the rising of this constellation out of
the ocean.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 317,
compare p. 44.</note> For example, in Manahiki or Humphrey's Island,
South Pacific, <q>when the constellation Pleiades was seen there was
unusual joy all over the month, and expressed by singing, dancing,
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
and blowing-shell trumpets.</q><note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi> (London, 1884),
p. 279.</note> So the Maoris of New Zealand,
another Polynesian people of the South Pacific, divided the year
into moons and determined the first moon by the rising of the
Pleiades, which they called <foreign rend='italic'>Matariki</foreign>.<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi>,
Second Edition (London, 1856), p.
219.</note> Indeed throughout Polynesia
the rising of the Pleiades (variously known as Matariki, Mataliki,
Matalii, Makalii, etc.) seems to have marked the beginning of
the year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The United States Exploring Expedition,
Ethnography and Philology</hi>,
by Horatio Hale (Philadelphia, 1846),
p. 170; E. Tregear, <hi rend='italic'>Maori-Polynesian
Comparative Dictionary</hi> (Wellington,
N.Z., 1891), p. 226.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the Melanesians.</note>
Among some of the Melanesians also the Pleiades occupy an
important position in the calendar. <q>The Banks' islanders and
Northern New Hebrides people content themselves with distinguishing
the Pleiades, by which the approach of yam harvest is marked.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The
Melanesians</hi> (Oxford, 1891), p. 348.
In the island of Florida the Pleiades
are called <foreign rend='italic'>togo ni samu</foreign>, <q>the company
of maidens</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 349).</note>
<q>Amongst the constellations, the Pleiades and Orion's belt seem to
be those which are most familiar to the natives of Bougainville
Straits. The former, which they speak of as possessing six stars,
they name <foreign rend='italic'>Vuhu</foreign>; the latter <foreign rend='italic'>Matatala</foreign>. They have also names for
a few other stars. As in the case of many other savage races, the
Pleiades is a constellation of great significance with the inhabitants
of these straits. The Treasury Islanders hold a great feast towards
the end of October, to celebrate, as far as I could learn, the
approaching appearance of the constellation above the eastern
horizon soon after sunset. Probably, as in many of the Pacific
Islands, this event marks the beginning of their year. I learned
from Mr. Stephens that, in Ugi, where of all the constellations the
Pleiades alone receives a name, the natives are guided by it in
selecting the times for planting and taking up the yams.</q><note place='foot'>H. B. Guppy, <hi rend='italic'>The Solomon Islands
and their Natives</hi> (London, 1887), p.
56.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the natives
of New
Guinea and
the Indian
Archipelago.</note>
The natives of the Torres Straits islands observe the appearance
of the Pleiades (<foreign rend='italic'>Usiam</foreign>) on the horizon at sunset; and when they
see it, they say that the new yam time has come.<note place='foot'>A. C. Haddon, <q>Legends from
Torres Straits,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, i. (1890) p.
195. We may conjecture that the
<q>new yam time</q> means the time for
planting yams.</note> The Kai and
the Bukaua, two agricultural tribes of German New Guinea, also
determine the season of their labour in the fields by observation of
the Pleiades: the Kai say that the time for such labours is when
the Pleiades are visible above the horizon at night.<note place='foot'>R. Neuhauss, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch Neu-Guinea</hi>
(Berlin, 1911), pp. 159, 431 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some
districts of northern Celebes the rice-fields are similarly prepared for
cultivation when the Pleiades are seen at a certain height above the
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
horizon.<note place='foot'>A. F. van Spreeuwenberg, <q>Een
blik op de Minahassa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neerlands Indië</hi>, Vierde Deel
(Batavia, 1845), p. 316; J. G. F.
Riedel, <q>De landschappen Holontalo,
Limoeto, Bone, Boalemo, en Kattinggola,
of Andagile,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xix. (1869) p. 140; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, iii. (1871) p. 404.</note> As to the Dyaks of Sarawak we read that <q>the Pleiades
themselves tell them when to farm; and according to their position
in the heavens, morning and evening, do they cut down the forest,
burn, plant, and reap. The Malays are obliged to follow their
example, or their lunar year would soon render their farming operations
unprofitable.</q><note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi>, Second
Edition (London, 1863), i. 214.
Compare H. Low, <hi rend='italic'>Sarawak</hi> (London,
1848), p. 251.</note> When the season for clearing fresh land in
the forest approaches, a wise man is appointed to go out before
dawn and watch for the Pleiades. As soon as the constellation is
seen to rise while it is yet dark, they know that the time has come
to begin. But not until the Pleiades are at the zenith before dawn
do the Dyaks think it desirable to burn the fallen timber and to sow
the rice.<note place='foot'>Dr. Charles Hose, <q>Various
Modes of computing the Time for
Planting among the Races of Borneo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 42 (Singapore,
1905), pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare
Charles Brooke, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years in Sarawak</hi>
(London, 1866), i. 59; Rev.
J. Perham, <q>Sea Dyak Religion,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society</hi>, No. 10 (Singapore,
1883), p. 229.</note> However, the Kenyahs and Kayans, two other tribes of
Sarawak, determine the agricultural seasons by observation of the
sun rather than of the stars; and for this purpose they have devised
certain simple but ingenious mechanisms. The Kenyahs measure
the length of the shadow cast by an upright pole at noon; and the
Kayans let in a beam of light through a hole in the roof and
measure the distance from the point immediately below the hole to
the place where the light reaches the floor.<note place='foot'>Dr. Charles Hose, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 4.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>The Natives of Borneo,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxiii. (1894) pp. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
where the writer tells us that the
Kayans and many other races in Borneo
sow the rice when the Pleiades appear
just above the horizon at daybreak,
though the Kayans more usually determine
the time for sowing by observation
of the sun. As to the Kayan
mode of determining the time for sowing
by the length of shadow cast by an
upright pole, see also W. Kükenthal,
<hi rend='italic'>Forschungsreise in den Molukken und
in Borneo</hi> (Frankfort, 1896), pp. 292
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Some Dyaks employ a species of
sun-dial for dating the twelve months
of the year. See H. E. D. Engelhaard,
<q>Aanteekeningen betreffende
de Kindjin Dajaks in het Landschap
Baloengan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxxix.
(1897) pp. 484-486.</note> But the Kayans of the
Mahakam river, in Dutch Borneo, determine the time for sowing by
observing when the sun sets in a line with two upright stones.<note place='foot'>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <hi rend='italic'>Quer durch
Borneo</hi> (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 160.</note> In
Bali, an island to the east of Java, the appearance of the Pleiades at
sunset in March marks the end of the year.<note place='foot'>F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der
mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. (Leipsic, 1906) p. 424.</note> The Pleiades and
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
Orion are the only constellations which the people of Bali observe
for the purpose of correcting their lunar calendar by intercalation.
For example, they bring the lunar year into harmony
with the solar by prolonging the month Asada until the Pleiades
are visible at sunset.<note place='foot'>R. Friederich, <q>Voorloopig Verslag
van het eiland Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen
van het Bataviaasch Genootschap
van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxiii.
(1849) p. 49.</note> The natives of Nias, an island to the
south of Sumatra, pay little heed to the stars, but they have
names for the Morning Star and for the Pleiades; and when
the Pleiades appear in the sky, the people assemble to till their
fields, for they think that to do so before the rising of the constellation
would be useless.<note place='foot'>J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B.
von Rosenberg, <q>Verslag omtrent het
eiland Nias en deszelfs Bewoners,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xxx. (Batavia, 1863) p. 119.</note> In some districts of Sumatra <q>much
confusion in regard to the period of sowing is said to have arisen
from a very extraordinary cause. Anciently, say the natives, it was
regulated by the stars, and particularly by the appearance (heliacal
rising) of the <foreign rend='italic'>bintang baniak</foreign> or Pleiades; but after the introduction
of the Mahometan religion, they were induced to follow the returns
of the <foreign rend='italic'>puāsa</foreign> or great annual fast, and forgot their old rules. The
consequence of this was obvious; for the lunar year of the <foreign rend='italic'>hejrah</foreign>
being eleven days short of the sidereal or solar year, the order of the
seasons was soon inverted; and it is only astonishing that its inaptness
to the purposes of agriculture should not have been immediately
discovered.</q><note place='foot'>W. Marsden, <hi rend='italic'>History of Sumatra</hi>,
Third Edition (London, 1811), p.
71.</note> The Battas or Bataks of central Sumatra date
the various operations of the agricultural year by the positions of
Orion and the Pleiades. When the Pleiades rise before the sun at
the beginning of July, the Achinese of northern Sumatra know that
the time has come to sow the rice.<note place='foot'>F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der
mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. (Leipsic, 1906) p. 428.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attention
paid to the
Pleiades by
the natives
of Africa, Greeks, and Romans.</note>
Scattered and fragmentary as these notices are, they suffice to
shew that the Pleiades have received much attention from savages
in the tropical regions of the world from Brasil in the east to
Sumatra in the west. Far to the north of the tropics the rude
Kamchatkans are said to know only three constellations, the Great
Bear, the Pleiades, and three stars in Orion.<note place='foot'>S. Krascheninnikow, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
des Landes Kamtschatka</hi> (Lemgo,
1766), p. 217. The three stars are
probably the Belt.</note> When we pass to
Africa we again find the Pleiades employed by tribes in various
parts of the continent to mark the seasons of the agricultural year.
We have seen that the Caffres of South Africa date their new year
from the rising of the Pleiades just before sunrise and fix the time
for sowing by observation of that constellation.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</note> <q>They calculate
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
only twelve lunar months for the year, for which they have descriptive
names, and this results in frequent confusion and difference of
opinion as to which month it really is. The confusion is always
rectified by the first appearance of Pleiades just before sunrise, and
a fresh start is made and things go on smoothly till once more the
moons get out of place, and reference has again to be made to the
stars.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, <hi rend='italic'>Light in
Africa</hi>, Second Edition (London,
1890), pp. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J.
Sechefo, <q>The Twelve Lunar Months
among the Basuto,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, iv.
(1909) p. 931.</note> According to another authority on the Bantu tribes of
South Africa, <q>the rising of the Pleiades shortly after sunset was
regarded as indicating the planting season. To this constellation,
as well as to several of the prominent stars and planets,
they gave expressive names. They formed no theories concerning
the nature of the heavenly bodies and their motions, and were not
given to thinking of such things.</q><note place='foot'>G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Records of
South-Eastern Africa</hi>, vii. (1901) p.
418. Compare G. Thompson, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
and Adventures in Southern Africa</hi>
(London, 1827), ii. 359.</note> The Amazulu call the Pleiades
<foreign rend='italic'>Isilimela</foreign>, which means <q>The digging-for (stars),</q> because when the
Pleiades appear the people begin to dig. They say that <q><foreign rend='italic'>Isilimela</foreign>
(the Pleiades) dies, and is not seen. It is not seen in winter; and
at last, when the winter is coming to an end, it begins to appear&mdash;one
of its stars first, and then three, until going on increasing it
becomes a cluster of stars, and is perfectly clear when the sun is
about to rise. And we say <foreign rend='italic'>Isilimela</foreign> is renewed, and the year
is renewed, and so we begin to dig.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of the Amazulu</hi>, Part iii.
(London, etc., 1870), p. 397.</note> The Bechuanas <q>are
directed by the position of certain stars in the heavens, that the
time has arrived, in the revolving year, when particular roots can be
dug up for use, or when they may commence their labours of the
field. This is their <foreign rend='italic'>likhakologo</foreign> (turnings or revolvings), or what we
should call the spring time of the year. The Pleiades they call
<foreign rend='italic'>seleméla</foreign>, which may be translated <q>cultivator,</q> or the precursor of
agriculture, from <foreign rend='italic'>leméla</foreign>, the relative verb to cultivate <emph>for</emph>; and <foreign rend='italic'>se</foreign>,
a pronominal prefix, distinguishing them as the actors. Thus,
when this constellation assumes a certain position in the heavens,
it is the signal to commence cultivating their fields and gardens.</q><note place='foot'>R. Moffat, <hi rend='italic'>Missionary Labours and
Scenes in Southern Africa</hi> (London,
1842), pp. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Among some of these South African tribes the period of seclusion
observed by lads after circumcision comes to an end with
the appearance of the Pleiades, and accordingly the youths are
said to long as ardently for the rising of the constellation as
Mohammedans for the rising of the moon which will put an end
to the fast of Ramadan.<note place='foot'>Stephen Kay, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Researches
in Caffraria</hi> (London, 1833),
p. 273.</note> The Hottentots date the seasons of the
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
year by the rising and setting of the Pleiades.<note place='foot'>Gustav Fritsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Eingeborenen
Süd-Afrika's</hi> (Breslau, 1872). p. 340.</note> An early Moravian
missionary settled among the Hottentots, reports that <q>at the return of
the Pleiades these natives celebrate an anniversary; as soon as these
stars appear above the eastern horizon mothers will lift their little ones
on their arms, and running up to elevated spots, will show to them
those friendly stars, and teach them to stretch their little hands towards
them. The people of a kraal will assemble to dance and to sing
according to the old custom of their ancestors. The chorus always
sings: <q>O Tiqua, our Father above our heads, give rain to us, that
the fruits (bulbs, etc.), <foreign rend='italic'>uientjes</foreign>, may ripen, and that we may have
plenty of food, send us a good year.</q></q><note place='foot'>Theophilus Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</hi>
(London, 1881), p. 43, quoting the
Moravian missionary George Schmidt,
who was sent out to the Cape of Good
Hope in 1737.</note> With some tribes of British
Central Africa the rising of the Pleiades early in the evening is the
signal for the hoeing to begin.<note place='foot'>H. S. Stannus, <q>Notes on some
Tribes of British Central Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the R. Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xl. (1910) p. 289.</note> To the Masai of East Africa the
appearance of the Pleiades in the wrest is the sign of the beginning
of the rainy season, which takes its name from the constellation.<note place='foot'>M. Merker, <hi rend='italic'>Die Masai</hi> (Berlin,
1894), pp. 155, 198.</note>
In Masailand the Pleiades are above the horizon from September
till about the seventeenth of May; and the people, as they express
it themselves, <q>know whether it will rain or not according to the
appearance or non-appearance of the six stars, called The Pleiades,
which follow after one another like cattle. When the month which
the Masai call <q>Of the Pleiades</q><note place='foot'>May.</note> arrives, and the Pleiades are no
longer visible, they know that the rains are over. For the Pleiades
set in that month and are not seen again until the season of
showers has come to an end:<note place='foot'>June-August.</note> it is then that they reappear.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi> (Oxford,
1905), p. 275, compare p. 333. The
<q>season of showers</q> seems to be a
name for the dry season (June, July,
August), when rain falls only occasionally;
it is thus distinguished from the
rainy season of winter, which begins
after the reappearance of the Pleiades
in September.</note>
The only other groups of stars for which the Masai appear to
have names are Orion's sword and Orion's belt.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi>, pp.
275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Nandi
of British East Africa have a special name (<foreign rend='italic'>Koremerik</foreign>) for the
Pleiades, <q>and it is by the appearance or non-appearance of these
stars that the Nandi know whether they may expect a good or a
bad harvest.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 100.</note> The Kikuyu of the same region say that <q>the
Pleiades is the mark in the heavens to show the people when to
plant their crops; they plant when this constellation is in a certain
position early in the night.</q><note place='foot'>C. W. Hobley, <q>Further Researches
into Kikuyu and Kamba
Religious Beliefs and Customs,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xli. (1911) p. 442.</note> In Sierra Leone <q>the proper time
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
for preparing the plantations is shewn by the particular situation in
which the Pleiades, called by the Bulloms <foreign rend='italic'>a-warrang</foreign>, the only stars
which they observe or distinguish by peculiar names, are to be seen
at sunset.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Winterbottom, <hi rend='italic'>An Account
of the Native Africans in the Neighbourhood
of Sierra Leone</hi> (London,
1803), p. 48.</note> We have seen that ancient Greek farmers reaped their
corn when the Pleiades rose at sunrise in May, and that they ploughed
their fields when the constellation set at sunrise in November.<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 383
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 615 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> See above, pp. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>.</note> The
interval between the two dates is about six months. Both the Greeks
and the Romans dated the beginning of summer from the heliacal
rising of the Pleiades and the beginning of winter from their heliacal
setting.<note place='foot'>Aratus, <hi rend='italic'>Phaenomena</hi>, 264-267;
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> ii. 123, 125, xviii.
280, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vergiliae privatim attinent ad
fructus, ut quarum exortu aestas incipiat,
occasu hiems, semenstri spatio
intra se messes vindemiasque et omnium
maturitatem conplexae.</foreign></q> Compare L.
Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi> (Berlin,
1825-1826), i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Pliny dated
the rising of the Pleiades on the 10th
of May and their setting on the 11th of
November (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> ii. 123, 125).</note> Pliny regarded the autumnal setting of the Pleiades as the
proper season for sowing the corn, particularly the wheat and the
barley, and he tells us that in Greece and Asia all the crops were
sown at the setting of that constellation.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. 49 and 223.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
widespread
association
of the
Pleiades
with agriculture
seems to be
based on
the coincidence
of
their rising
or setting
with the
commencement
of
the rainy
season.</note>
So widespread over the world has been and is the association of
the Pleiades with agriculture, especially with the sowing or planting
of the crops. The reason for the association seems to be the coincidence
of the rising or setting of the constellation with the commencement
of the rainy season; since men must very soon have learned
that the best, if not the only, season to sow and plant is the time
of year when the newly-planted seeds or roots will be quickened by
abundant showers. The same association of the Pleiades with rain
seems sufficient to explain their importance even for savages who
do not till the ground; for ignorant though such races are, they yet
can hardly fail to observe that wild fruits grow more plentifully, and
therefore that they themselves have more to eat after a heavy fall of
rain than after a long drought. In point of fact we saw that some
of the Australian aborigines, who are wholly ignorant of agriculture,
look on the Pleiades as the givers of rain, and curse the constellation
if its appearance is not followed by the expected showers.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</note> On the
other side of the world, and at the opposite end of the scale of
culture, the civilised Greeks similarly supposed that the autumnal
setting of the Pleiades was the cause of the rains which followed it;
and the astronomical writer Geminus thought it worth while to argue
against the supposition, pointing out that the vicissitudes of the
weather and of the seasons, though they may coincide with the
risings and settings of the constellations, are not produced by them,
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
the stars being too distant from the earth to exercise any appreciable
influence on our atmosphere. Hence, he says, though the constellations
serve as the signals, they must not be regarded as the causes,
of atmospheric changes; and he aptly illustrates the distinction by a
reference to beacon-fires, which are the signals, but not the causes,
of war.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
xvii. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> If <q>the sweet influences
of the Pleiades</q> in the Authorised
Version of the English Bible were an
exact translation of the corresponding
Hebrew words in Job xxxviii. 31, we
should naturally explain the <q>sweet influences</q>
by the belief that the autumnal
setting of the constellation is the cause
of rain. But the rendering of the
words is doubtful; it is not even certain
that the constellation referred to is the
Pleiades. See the commentaries of
A. B. Davidson and Professor A. S.
Peak on the passage. The Revised
English Version translates the words
in question <q>the cluster of the
Pleiades.</q> Compare H. Grimme, <hi rend='italic'>Das
israelitische Pfingstfest und der Plejadenkult</hi>
(Paderborn, 1907), pp. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
